 In this work we obtain capacity for a class of pair bidirectional relay , where one relay can help between the corresponding user . For the , we apply the generalization of successive compute strategy for the linear of the of each user pair at the relay . The channel is considered as a broadcast network . It is shown that for all channel gains , the achievable rate boundary within of N and N sec below the cut set upper bound for restricted and nonrestricted , respectively . These tend to sec per user to infinity . We first derive a comprehensive formulation for the step asymmetric and use it to derive the capacity result for our problem . In , a compute and forward strategy been for relay with equal power and asymmetric channel gains based on lattice . The receiver can recover the associated linear which are closer to the channel fading . This strategy simultaneously protection against noise and the opportunity to exploit interference for gains . In , a scheme been for relay with unequal power and symmetric channel gains based on lattice where it an achievable cast rate within a constant gap below the capacity . In , a successive scheme been for the same network as defined in . In this method after a linear combination of , the receiver can combine it with its channel observation to obtain a new effective channel that is better for the next targeted linear combination . In and an asymmetric been for and relay , respectively , with unequal power and asymmetric channel gains based on lattice . In and , a asymmetric strategy been . The method a set of scaling to decode integer linear of . The use of scaling in fact is equivalent to non integer linear of lattice . It different to have different . Thus , by appropriately those , different on the boundary of the rate region can be . Also , in , the idea of non integer linear of lattice been which can be considered as a special case of the of and . In this paper we generalize the method of to . We also consider scaling as defined in . Then we use these to address Pair Relay , where one relay can help between the user of each of the relay . We present an achievable rate region for the based on the generalization of the strategy . It is shown that this method within log N and log N of the cut set upper bound for the restricted and non restricted , respectively . to infinity , these tend asymptotically to . Some of the previous works about these are as : In , an achievable rate region was for two way relay based on the of lattice and . In that network , a relay node the communication between two of . They assume a complex channel model . It was shown that for all channel gains , to within sec per user of the cut set upper bound are achievable . In , we studied the same network model as in but with the assumption of real channel model , a achievable rate region for that network by lattice and the successive compute and forward approach of . It was shown that this method within and sec per user of the cut set upper bound for restricted and non restricted network , respectively . The paper is organized as : In Section the system model for the general relay network is defined . In Section we present our generalization of the approach . The system model , achievable rate and capacity for the pair two way relay are in Section . Some concluding are provided in Section . In this section we consider a relay network . We use the same model as defined in , but with the assumption of unequal power and asymmetric channel gains . Each relay indexed by , a noisy linear combination of the through the channel , where are the channel gains and is i . i .. noise , , In . Let denote the vector of channel gains from relay . Each channel input ` is a length sequence subject to the average power constraint `, for all `, i . e . The channel gains are assumed to be known and constant . ; denote the set of , and to the nearest integer value . Throughout the paper , are shown with . In this section we propose a straightforward and comprehensive upper bound to the rate of the step asymmetric successive compute and forward strategy . We consider the system model as defined in Section , which unequal power and asymmetric channel gains . We also consider real valued scaling for the non integer linear combination of lattice . In step , at each step , the receiver can combine its estimation from the previous step with its channel observation to obtain a new effective channel that is better for the next targeted linear combination . This for . The general formulation step is expressed in the following theorem . Theorem . Consider the relay network defined in Sec with unequal power P and equation coefficient ami , where ami ami , ami , and i ;. Let real . By step strategy , if the computation rate R is achievable , then Remark . For , and ` , for all `, to the in . Remark . Equal power and asymmetric channel For ,` , and ` , for all `, to the in and . Remark . Unequal power and symmetric channel For , , ` for all `, and a I , to the in . As it is seen from the above , the formulation in is capable of both unequal power and asymmetric channel even if we omit the scaling from the . In this section we present the system model for a class of pair two way relay channel of . We express the cut set upper bound , achievable rate based on the asymmetric strategy and calculate the capacity . We also show that the according to the channel gains the achievable rate region . A shown in Fig . , where i and i denote the pair of which can communicate to each other via node a relay . There is no direct link between . The relay is assumed to be able to listen and transmit at the same time . and related to the pair are as and For each ;, let ; denote the set of all the of , where i , and , such that if , nil then , i . e ., include two of a pair . For example for , , denote the set of i , such that , for ;, number of the of . For , , let , denote the other node in a pair which with , i . e ., if then . Let ; denote the message that pair i to Fig . : The pair two way relay channel . node of pair i . This message is into a an function , for ;, where , the number of channel , is a realization of a real random variable , satisfying the power constraint , and , the previously received at node , of pair i ;. This mode , non restricted , can introduce some dependency between the by different . In contrast , restricted the function . The are assumed to be independent . The rate of transmission is defined as . The received at node , for all i ,, and at the relay node ,, at time instant , are given by respectively , where the signal by the relay at instant . and are independent and of i . i .. real valued noise , . and denote the and channel gains , respectively , for all i ,. Node a function to decode as , where . In this section the cut set upper bound for restricted and non restricted are given . These are of the cut set upper bound in and for two pair two way relay . Theorem . The capacity region of the non restricted is upper bounded by , Proof : Consider the cut ;, the first and second in the right hand side of b denote the upper for the multiple access and the broadcast of the relay network , respectively . Corollary . For the capacity region of the restricted , we have the outer bound a but b is as , where ;. The proof can be considering the fact that the are mutually independent in the restricted network . Lemma . The non restricted cut set upper bound is within bit sec of the restricted cut set upper bound . Proof : The proof can be done by the same way as done for two pair two way relay network in . In this section we present an achievable rate region for the . In our scheme , we use a restricted function , so it will be an achievable rate region for both restricted and non restricted network . The idea is based on the fact that in the communication , can be considered as an network with N and one receiver , and so we can apply the asymmetric successive compute and forward method to decode the linear of the of each pair successively . In the , is considered as a broadcast channel with one transmitter at the is done by successive interference cancellation . Note that we of N , because of the fact that each pair is a two way relay channel and the of each pair is not considered as a broadcast channel since each receiver about its own message and can subtract it from the its signal . at the : N are such that N . For each ` : N , ` second moment ` , for some distinct i : and , , where P P . All are assumed to be simultaneously good . For each message of , the ` ` is , where ` the region of `, and ` : N . The transmitter i where ` ` and ` is a random vector uniformly distributed in `. So , and to an ensemble of lattice with sizes , with independent of ` and uniformly distributed in `. at the Relay : at the Relay is done according to the successive compute and forward method in Theorem . Here we have one relay , so . Without loss of generality , we assume , At the stage of successive compute and forward , the relay the linear of lattice code Theorem . The coefficient ai can be successfully at the stage successive compute and forward , so long as , Proof : The combination of the channel gains and node the following vector of incoming signal at the relay : is defined as More similarity between and in a achievable rate region see Theorem . So we select and . Also in order to attain simpler and also a achievable rate , we consider power allocation of the as , at the relay : The ti to from with sizes for i ;, respectively , where at : at is done by the successive interference cancellation method . In this way , the user with the channel gain first the related to the with worse channel gain . Then , it the message related to itself , i . e ., the message of the other user which to its pair . Thus , at each user with a specific channel gain , only the of other with higher channel gains can cause interference . For each , let ; i denote the such that for each , for some j , . By the strategy , it can be seen that the following message are : For example , let , and assume that , so we have S , S , , S , , S , S , , S , , and at the is done as : at the of the first pair , i . e ., , , with channel gains and can be done with an arbitrary small probability of error if the message associated to User of the first pair the highest channel gain , thus it first the other and then them from its received signal . Then it the message of user of the first pair . For user of the first pair so the part and part of make interference in the of part . By the same reasoning , the following message are for at the other , In this section we state the capacity gap for the and of the restricted in the following Lemma : Lemma . By the strategy , for any rate i ;, , satisfying where ;, there a choice of power such that of at the in the be done with arbitrary small error probability for all channel gain . Proof . We must show that if , and a d are satisfied , all power scaling between zero and are . Next we prove the theorem for a and b , the proof for the can be done similarly . We need the following inequality : if then From the above Lemma , it is seen that the maximum gap between inner and outer is , and from Lemma for the non restricted , this gap is sec per user . For , i . e ., the two way relay channel , the gap for the non restricted channel model is equal to which is compatible with the result of in the literature . For , i . e . the two pair two way relay , the for restricted and non restricted channel , respectively which are the same as . As , the for restricted and non restricted channel , i . e ., and asymptotically goes to . In this work , we a comprehensive asymmetric step successive compute and forward scheme which the previously . Based on the approach , we the capacity for a class of pair two way relay , where one relay can . It was shown that for all channel gain , the compute and forward scheme to within constant log N and log N sec per user of the cut set upper bound for the restricted and the non restricted network , respectively . These tend asymptotically to sec per user to infinity . ﻿ We show that the structural similarity index , which is used in image to assess the similarity between an image representation and an original reference image , can be as a locally quadratic distortion measure . We , furthermore , show that recent of Linder and on the rate distortion function under locally quadratic distortion are applicable to this distortion measure . We finally derive the high resolution and provide a simple method to numerically compute an approximation of the of real . A vast majority of the work on source with a fidelity criterion i . e ., rate distortion theory on the mean squared error fidelity criterion . The fidelity criterion is used mainly due to its mathematical tractability . However , in a human observer it been noted that distortion which include some of human perception generally perform better than the . A great number of perceptual distortion are distortion and , unfortunately , even for simple , their corresponding rate distortion , that is , the minimum to attain a distortion equal to or smaller than some given value , are not known . However , in certain it is possible to derive their . For example , for a process with a weighted squared error criterion , where the are restricted to be linear time invariant , the complete was first found in and later by several , . Other include the special case of locally quadratic distortion for fixed rate vector and under high resolution , which are extended to variable rate vector in , , and applied to perceptual audio in , . In , Wang al . the structural similarity index as a perceptual measure of the similarity between an image representation and an original reference image . The index into account the between the image and its representation as well as the first and second order . It been shown that this index a more accurate estimate of the quality than the . The index was used for image in and was cast in the framework of compression of and image in . The relation between the rate of a fixed rate uniform and the distortion measured by the index was first in . In particular , for several of source and under high resolution , upper and lower on the index were provided as a function of the operational rate of the . In this paper , we present the high resolution for with finite differential entropy and under an index distortion measure . The is particularly important for and within the image area , since it a lower bound on the number of that any coder , for example and so forth , will use when an image into a representation , which an index not smaller than a level . Thus , it one to compare the performance of a architecture to the optimum performance theoretically attainable . The is and does not appear to admit a simple closed form expression . However , when the rate is high , that is , when each of the image is by a high number of , say more than . , then we are able to find a simple expression , which is asymptotically as the bit rate exact . For finite and small bit , our an approximation of the true . In order to find the , we first show that the index can be as a locally quadratic distortion measure . We then show that recent of Linder and on the under locally quadratic distortion are applicable , and finally obtain a closed form expression for the high resolution . We end the paper by showing how to numerically approximate the high resolution of real . In this section , we present an important result on rate distortion theory for locally quadratic distortion and also present the index . We will need these when proving our main , that is , and in Section . . . Rate Distortion Theory for Locally Quadratic Distortion . Let be a realization of a source vector process and let be the corresponding reproduction vector . A distortion measure , is said to be locally quadratic if it a series i . e ., it of all in a neighborhood around the of interest and furthermore , if the second order of its series dominate the distortion asymptotically as corresponding to the high resolution regime . In other , if , is locally quadratic , then it can be written as , O y , where is an input dependent positive definite matrix and where to , the quadratic term i . e ., is . We use upper to the stochastic process generating a use to denote the differential entropy of , provided it . The determinant of a and E the expectation operator . The for locally quadratic distortion and smooth was found by Linder and and is given by the following theorem . Theorem see . Suppose , some mild technical see a in Section . A in where is the of in per block under distortion ,, and the differential entropy of . The distribution of image and image of natural can in general be sufficiently well by smooth , . Thus , the regularity of Theorem are satisfied for many naturally . . . The Structural Similarity Index . Let , where . We define the following empirical : the sample mean ni , the sample , and the sample cross variance . We define and similarly . where , i , . The index between and , where positive close to indicate a small perceptual distortion . We can define a distortion measure as one minus the index , that is , which between and and where a value close to a small distortion . The index is locally applied the image . Then , all block are to yield the index of the entire image . We treat each block as an dimensional vector where N . In this section , we present the main theoretical of this paper . We will first show that , is locally quadratic and then use Theorem to obtain the for the index . Theorem . The high resolution for the the distortion measure ,, defined in and where and EX , is given by Proof . Recall from Theorem that , is locally quadratic . Moreover , the weighting matrix in , which is also known as a sensitivity matrix , is given by A . , see the appendix . In the appendix , it is also shown that is positive definite since a , a , for all , where a and are given by and , respectively . From A . , it that At this point , we note that the main technical for Theorem to be applicable is boundedness in the following sense : , E log , and E trace and furthermore uniformly bounded third order partial of ,. The first two are satisfied by the of the Theorem . The next two follow since all of are bounded for all see the proof of Theorem . Moreover , due to the positive stabilization C and C , trace is clearly bounded . Finally , it was established in the proof of Theorem that the third order of , are uniformly bounded . Thus , the proof now simply by in . . . the Rate Distortion Function . In this section we propose a simple method for the in practice based on real . Conveniently , we do not need to encode the in order to find their corresponding high resolution . Thus , the in this section as well as the in the previous are independent of any specific architecture . In practice , the source statistics are often not available and must therefore be found from the image data . Towards that end , one may assume that the individual i Mi where i the image total number of in the image of the image constitute approximately independent of a vector process . In this case , we can approximate the expectation by the empirical arithmetic mean , that is , where a i and i that the a in and are used on the Table : n E log log for some bit grey and block sizes N , , , and . Table : in dim or equivalently per for different bit grey and block sizes N , , and . i . Several of n E log log are shown in Table , for various commonly considered in the image literature . In order to obtain the high resolution of the image , according to Theorem , we also need the differential entropy of the image , which is usually not known a in practice . Thus , we need to numerically estimate , for example , by the average empirical differential entropy over all of the image . In order to do this , we apply the two dimensional on each of the of the image in order to reduce the correlation within the since the is an orthogonal transform , this operation will not affect the differential entropy . Then we use a entropy estimation approach to approximate the marginal differential of the within a . Finally , we approximate by the sum of the marginal differential , which the in Table . In this section , we use the on the and measure the corresponding of the reconstructed . In particular , we use the coder implementation available via the function in . Then , we compare these operational to the information theoretic high resolution as in the previous section . We are interested in the high resolution region , which to small , i . e ., close to zero or equivalently large i . e ., close to one . Figure the high resolution for , below . , corresponding to above . . Notice that the rate becomes negative at large i . e ., small , which because the high resolution assumption is clearly not satisfied and the are therefore Figure : High resolution under the similarity measure , , for different and an block size . not accurate . Thus , it does not make sense to evaluate the asymptotic of Theorem at large . The information theoretic high resolution by Theorem a lower bound on the achievable minimum rate for a given distortion value . As in , the high resolution could require the use of optimal compounding , which may not be feasible in some . Thus , the of whether the in Theorem is achievable and how to achieve it , remain open . Nevertheless , we can obtain a loose estimate of how close a practical scheme could get to the high resolution by the operational performance of , for example , the . Figure the operational for the coder used on the image and block sizes of . For comparison , we have also shown the . It may be that the operational curve is up to above the corresponding a similar behavior is for the other four in the test set . The gap between the and the operational based on as can be in Figure can be by the following . First , the coder at a frequency weighted rather than the index . Second , is a practical algorithm with reduced complexity and is therefore not optimal even for the weighted . Third , the differential entropy as well as the expectation of the log of the determinant of the sensitivity matrix are found based on a finite amount of image data . Thus , they are only of the true . Finally , the becomes exact in the asymptotic limit where the rate Figure : Operational the coder on the image under the similarity measure , , for block size . For comparison we have also shown the high resolution thin line . towards infinity i . e ., for small . At finite , it is an approximation . Nevertheless , within these , the numerical evaluation of the here that significant compression gains could be by an optimal image coder , at least at high rate . To obtain further insight into this question , the corresponding under distortion for the image is shown in Figure . We can see that the excess rate of with respect to the at high is not greater than . . This that a like algorithm at distortion could reduce at least a fraction of the bit rate gap seen in Figure . It is interesting to note that , in the case , we have I , which that log . Thus , the difference between the and the , under high resolution , is constant e .., independent of the bit rate . In fact , if the is measured per dimension , then the rate difference is given by the in Table , that is , n E log log . It that the is simply a version of the at high . Moreover , the gap between the the fact that , in general , a representation of an image which is optimal is not necessarily also optimal . We have shown that , under high resolution , the for a range of natural under the commonly used index a simple form . In fact , the only upon the differential entropy of the source image as well as the value of a function of the sensitivity matrix of the image . Thus , it is independent of any specific Figure : Operational the coder on the image under the distortion measure . For comparison we have also shown the high resolution thin line . The horizontal axes on the top and the bottom show the and , respectively . architecture . Moreover , we also provided a simple method to estimate the in practice for a given image . Finally , we the operational performance of the image coder to the and by approximate numerical that potentially significant perceptual rate distortion could be by optimal . We need to show that the second order of the series of , are in the high resolution limit where . In order to do this , we show that the series of the zero and first order vanish whereas the of the second and third order are nonzero . Then , we upper bound the remainder due to , by its second order series . This upper bound is established via the third order partial of ,. We finally show that the second order decay more slowly towards zero than the remainder . Let us define C C and C C and let h . It that , and we note that the second order partial with respect to and for any i ,, are given by Clearly , where that the expression , y yis at the , . Since xi , it is easy to show that , for all i . Thus , the of the first order of the series of , are zero . Moreover , it from A . that h g , for all i ,. With this , and after some algebra , it can be shown that We now let denote the partial derivative respect to note that from generalized product rule f . When at that , this and an dimensional ball of radius centered at , let , and let T be the second order series of , centered at i . e ., at . It that T i , i , i , A . where is given by half the second order partial of ,, that is see A . , Thus , a and i a , i ,..., . Since is symmetric , the quadratic form is lower bounded by where min min i ni min a , a , which that is positive definite . On the other hand , it is known from theorem that for any , the remainder R , where that is , is upper bounded by the over the set of third order of the series of . Since for real , the are finite , and since , i , , it from A . A . that the third order are uniformly bounded therefore finite . Moreover , for all such that e , it A . , A . , and A . that where A . since i ,..., i , and the sum in A . over all possible of third order partial of a vector of length , that is , i ,, n . Furthermore , A . . Finally , by use . from A . and the fact that i the fact bounded by A . . Since the limit of A . and is zero , we deduce that the second order of the series of , are asymptotically as The work of . is by the Research Council for Technology and Production , Grant no . . The work of . is by the Project no . and the Project no . ACT . ﻿ We analyze the behavior of the mean squared error achievable by , uniform scalar quantization feedback , and post of unrestricted order , when wide sense stationary discrete time random possibly unbounded support . Our are based upon the use of uniform scalar . We consider the number of quantization to be given and fixed , which itself to fixed rate , and focus on the in which is insufficient to avoid overload . In order to guarantee the stability of the closed loop , we consider the use of a clipper before the scalar . Our are valid for zero mean independent whose satisfy some mild , which are met by infinite support such as and . We show that , for fixed , the can be made to decay with the ratio as when to infinity , where . We note that the latter bound is asymptotic in but not in , and that it clipping . is well know that can reduce the magnitude of the reconstruction error that from the of an source , see ., e .., . This reduction is by to digital such as sigma delta , which have been successfully in audio and image quantization as , where is the ratio and the order of the feedback filter assumed fixed for all of . In their analysis , the of an additive noise model , in which quantization are assumed to form a wide sense stationary ... random process , white and uncorrelated with the input . Also the , it was recently shown in that by different of unrestricted order for each value of , the can be made to decay as , where the signal to noise ratio of the scalar . The analysis in and restrict to the where the effect of overload is negligible , which cannot be if when the source unbounded support unless infinitely many quantization are available . Indeed , an important body of literature related to quantization overload either by careful design of the or by simply assuming there exist enough quantization to avoid overload , see e .., , and the therein . of bit two level in which the , , by following a deterministic approach . The in yield a continuous time reconstruction error that can be term proportional to , where is independent of . In turn , the continuous time reconstruction error with the in can be uniformly bounded as when . This immediately to an that as , when . To the best of the author knowledge , the latter is the decay rate of the reconstruction error with available in the literature . However , the in and have not been extended to with more than two quantization , and rely upon the input being uniformly bounded . On the other hand , available on the quantization of unbounded the effects of overload do not consider , see , e .., and the therein . In this letter , we study the behaviour of the with increasing ratio when the source is a possibly unbounded wide sense stationary ... band limited process . Our analysis is based upon the use of a uniform scalar , by a clipper , together with feedback , and post of unrestricted order see Fig . . We focus on the in which the number of quantization is insufficient to avoid overload . We show that , for this architecture , the Assumption : The source process independent , with zero mean and symmetric probability density function . Moreover , there a constant such that the th of each satisfy This letter the work in by taking account of clipping in the analysis . Our are related with the feedback quantization architecture shown in Fig . . In this scheme , the form a zero mean ... process , from sampling a ... band limited signal . For each ratio In and is the square root of the of the input process when . It is assumed that the input process finite power , i . e ., that . For simplicity , we shall further restrict the analysis to the in which . Notice also from that the total power of in of variance per sample , remains constant for all interval and reconstruction . is a random process with i . i .. independent of and uniformly distributed over the interval dither to the input of the the range for the input signal over which overload cannot occur . Since the dither is distributed over , this range is . It is well known that such a dither signal a quantization error process with i . i .. which are also independent of the source , , provided overload . Quantization error appear in the output as the stationary process . In order to keep as shown in Fig . . The clipper the value of the input signal so that , if , or thus stability , see . The key point here is that , unlike overload , clipping , given by , are not into the feedback loop . Instead , clipping appear in the output after being by , to yield the process . Unless the source is a stationary process , one cannot guarantee that the of the clipping error will form a stationary , or even a ..., random process . In order to quantify the contribution of clipping to the for not necessarily stationary , we define the average power of clipping in the output as Two important the under which the combination of clipper and operate are the signal to noise ratio It from and that , if and are kept fixed , then can only be at the expense of reducing the at For the scheme of Fig . , it was shown in that the reconstruction due to granular quantization only , which here to , can be upper bounded as i . e ., on , for every , where . In and , can be any bounded , nonzero gain . With the optimal in , to and the variance via Notice the upper bound on the due to granular quantization in exponentially with . However , the behaviour of the average power of clipping with increasing is unknown . Therefore , in view of , the exponential decay of given by does not necessarily hold for , for sufficiently large . In the next section we find an upper bound to the total average power of the reconstruction error , clipping . Proof : From one of , given in , Sec . . , we have that every , the bound for the first inequality in is with . Substituting this into . The latter , together with the fact that directly to , the proof . The following theorem an upper bound for applicable but not restricted to in which the source unbounded support . Theorem : Suppose there a scalar such that see . Suppose that Assumption : A BOUND ON THE OF QUANTIZATION WITH FEEDBACK Thus , we have an upper bound on the due to clipping that linearly with and exponentially with provided the product does not tend to zero as , see . The above upper bound for does not tend to zero with increasing unless one the loading factor grow with fast enough . Substituting and into . From the latter , we have that , where . Thus , the term due to clipping in can be reduced only at the expense of operate at a lower . This , in turn , the term due to granular decay more slowly with increasing . The optimal decay rate when is by choosing and so as to make granular and clipping error decay at the same asymptotic rate . This is if and only if and are chosen so that . Before the above limit , note that from we obtain since , being a random variable uniformly distributed over , standard deviation and with . rule to twice and substituting by , we obtain that We have studied the asymptotic behaviour of the reconstruction of fixed rate quantization with feedback as the ratio to infinity , for ... possibly unbounded support . It was shown that with the proper choice of and loading factor for each , the can decrease with at least as fast as , where does not depend on . ﻿ This paper with the design of feedback to encode plant output in control with data rate constrained . Starting form a nominal design made under the assumption of transparent communication links , we show how to design a feedback so as to systematically reduce the impact of quantization on closed loop performance . To obtain our , we model quantization as additive white noise with a signal to noise ratio constraint . As a , we obtain a simple characterization of the minimal noise ratio that one to design a feedback that stability . This bound only upon the plant and controller unstable . If the plant is strongly , then the bound is consistent with the absolute minimal data rate for stabilization in previous work . Standard control theory with where the communication links between plant and controller can be as transparent see , e .., , . There exist , however , where the links in a control system are far from being transparent and may become in the achievable performance . Control where this are collectively to as Control see , e .., , , , and the many therein . Clearly , unless the channel are explicitly taken into account at the design stage , the performance of an may be far from optimal and sometimes completely unsatisfactory . The main that need to be considered when dealing with include data rate i . e ., quantization , data loss and random . A framework for the treatment of the general design problem does not exist . Nevertheless , there been significant progress in the study of specific that focus on . For example , data rate have been studied in , , , , and design to deal with quantization have been in , e .., , . The issue of data loss been studied in , , , among many , and have been considered in , e .., , , , . In this paper we focus on linear time invariant plant , and concentrate on the effects of quantization on closed loop performance . Within this framework , a key result in the minimal data rate which is necessary and sufficient to achieve stabilization of an unstable plant , to its in very simple way . This bound been linked to information theoretic where it been given an interpretation akin to that of entropy see , e .., , , . Furthermore , , established that the minimal data rate for stabilization is sometimes consistent with minimal noise ratio in standard one degree of freedom control that employ . More precisely , , that , if the plant is defined in discrete time , relative degree one and is minimum phase , then a memoryless channel a signal to noise ratio equal to the lower bound derived in , would exhibit a channel capacity equal to the data rate bound in . The above give absolute lower on the admissible channel data rate which cannot be by by any control law . It , however , quite difficult to obtain practical design from such as those in , , . This some to move towards a simplified treatment of quantization . For example , quantization as a sector bound uncertainty and standard robust control . On the other hand , a simple white noise model for quantization . The latter model for quantization close to the signal literature , where it been successfully used to design high performance quantization see , e .., , , , , . In the present work we assume that a controller already been designed under the assumption of transparent communication links . However , we subsequently extend the set up by assuming that the control loop to be a bit rate limited channel in the plant to controller communication link . Thus , the plant output have to be prior to transmission . To that end , we borrow from the signal literature and employ a feedback to encode the plant output see , e .., , . a fixed signal to noise ratio additive noise model for quantization , we show how to design the feedback so as to systematically reduce the impact of quantization on closed loop performance , as measured by the error variance . We show via that our approach very good even for bit as low as one bit per sample . We also study stability for this linear model . As a , we obtain a simple characterization of the minimal signal to noise ratio that one to design a feedback system that stability . This result is expressed in of the plant and controller unstable only . For stable , and regardless of the plant or relative degree , our suggest a minimal data rate for stabilization that is consistent with the bound in . The idea of designing to embellish given controller is not new . For example , our previous work in a scheme that turns out to be a special case of the one considered here . On the other hand , the same architecture as the one studied in this paper , but the design procedure in that quantization effects are relatively small . The methodology used in the current paper does not require this assumption . Also , the stability analysis included in the current paper goes beyond the of , . Another related line of work been in , , . The latter work a precise deterministic stability analysis when the system is constrained to be a modulator or thereof ; see , e .., , but does not address performance . Another recent publication closely related to the current paper is . In that work , the propose a architecture similar to the one in this paper , but restrict the to have infinitely many and a quantization step . The latter are not here . Interestingly , the optimal coder in which on a time domain functional turns out to have a structure that is a special case of the architecture considered here . The remainder of this paper is organized as : Section the notation employed in the paper . Section the architecture of interest and a linear model that is suitable for analysis and synthesis linear system theoretical . Section stability of the linear model , while Section the design procedure . Section a simulation study . Concluding are included in Section . We use standard vector space notation for , i . e ., N . We also both the argument of the transform and as the forward shift operator , where the meaning is clear from the context . Given any matrix , and denote conjugate transposition and transposition , respectively . Given any complex scalar , and magnitude and complex conjugation , respectively . The set of all discrete time real rational transfer is by . We define six : all proper transfer , all strictly proper transfer , all stable and proper transfer , U all matrices in that have in , all stable and strictly proper transfer , all transfer that have only outside the unit circle and are either proper or improper . For any A we define A , A . We say that A is unitary if and only if A A I . We also define A , A A . Every A with no on the unit circle to L in which case we define the norm of A via see , e .., For each such A , we can always find and A such that A A Any transfer matrix A an inner outer factorization of the form where Ai is unitary i . e ., Ai is inner and is a scalar transfer function , that no in i . e ., is scalar and outer . Moreover , if A no on the unit circle , then U see , e .., . Given any wide sense stationary process , we denote its power spectral density by , its variance by and its standard deviation by . We note that if , in addition , an always positive rational spectrum , then we can always find a spectral factor U such that , ,. We also recall the well known fact that see , e .., . In this paper , we will consider the architecture in Figure . In that figure , is the plant model , is a controller , is the plant output , is the reference signal , do output and to measurement noise . Unlike standard non see , e ., , , the feedback path in Figure a communication channel and a source system and . The main focus of the current paper in designing this system , performance in mind . To that end , we utilize as the performance assessment quantity the stationary variance of the error e , defined via Since our aim is to design , we will assume that the controller in Figure been already designed assuming transparent communication links . The control loop formed by and when transparent communication links are in place i . e ., when ym in Figure will be to as the nominal loop or nominal design . The transfer function is the nominal loop sensitivity function and is the nominal loop complementary sensitivity function see . Assumption Plant and nominal design The plant model to , whilst the controller ,, to , is non zero and is such that the nominal loop is stable and well in the standard sense ; see , e .., , . The assumption that the nominal loop is stable and well defined is , of course , sensible in our context where the system is designed a . We assume that is strictly proper for simplicity . In principle , this can be removed at the expense of additional technical care . On the other hand , the assumption of being non zero non interesting , where the nominal loop is such that is left in open loop i . e ., uncontrolled . Assumption The , do and are mutually independent scalar zero mean , each a rational power spectral density that , if not identically zero , a spectral factor in U . In this paper , we will focus on error free bit rate limited . As a consequence , the input to the channel , i . e ., see Figure , must be prior to transmission . To that end , we will consider a standard feedback as in Figure also known as a noise shaping ; see , e .., , . In that figure , A , and are in that need to be designed anda uniform see , e .., , , i . e ., the dynamic range , , V the number quantization . We recall that a is said to be if and only if the absolute value of its input is greater than its dynamic range , i . e ., for some N . If the does not overload , then the quantization noise , defined via As already in Section . , we are interested in designing for nominal . In this setting , it is natural to employ that , in the absence of channel , have unit transfer function . That is , we will utilize that achieve perfect reconstruction . In our case , the channel is assumed to be error free and hence . As a consequence , it is straightforward to see from Figure that It from that perfect reconstruction is tantamount to A for every . On the other hand , in order to have a properly defined feedback loop around the it is necessary to have a strictly proper see , e .., Chapter in . We summarize the previous discussion as : Constraint Structural on the feedback The feedback are such that A and . Quantization is a deterministic non linear operation and hence , the exact analysis of is difficult see , e .., , , , . It thus become standard , particularly in the signal literature see , e .., , , , , , , to approximate quantization noise by an additive white noise source uncorrelated with the input of the . Here , we adopt this paradigm and assume the following : Assumption Quantization noise model The quantization noise signal defined in is a sequence of i . i .. random uniformly distributed in , and uncorrelated with . Note that we do not assume that the quantization noise is uncorrelated with , which is certainly not the case since the quantization noise is fed back to the input of the and , moreover , the system is inside the main feedback control loop . Instead , we adopt a milder assumption that only with the exogenous in . We stress that the previous model is valid only if is small enough , the does not overload anda smooth probability density see , e .., . These usually do not hold in the case of that are in feedback see , e .., the discussion regarding stand alone feedback in . Nevertheless , one can make use of see , e .., , to render the model in Assumption exact provided no overload . Despite the above , we will see in the simulation study included in Section , that , even if one a non uniform with as few as , the made the simple model in Assumption are surprisingly accurate see also simulation in , , . In order to guarantee that the does not overload , in principle one needs to consider infinite quantization or assume that the input is bounded , which is seldom the case in a stochastic framework . In practice , it is standard to choose a dynamic range such that the probability of overload is negligible see , e ., . Indeed , and is any positive real , then one can always find a finite a such that choosing that the probability of overload is less than ; a is the loading factor . With such a choice for the factor , it is immediate to see that where we have used the fact that , according to Assumption This the following additional assumption : Assumption Fixed signal to noise ratio For a fixed number of quantization , the variance of the quantization noise is proportional to the variance of the signal being , i . e ., the a fixed signal to noise ratio defined via Assumption is a key constraint . As before , it one to guarantee that the dynamic range is always properly scaled . In addition , it a effect on the optimization based design of the system . Indeed , if this constraint were not in place i . e ., assumed to have some statistics , then it would be optimal to choose and A with . This is , of course , not a sensible choice since A and grow unbounded when . Remark We would like to stress that , in some , overload may become the dominant quantization effect in feedback . Indeed , overload may trigger limit cycle that are , of course , not by the linear model for quantization above see , e .., , , . As by and , we assume in this paper that overload is infrequent enough and , accordingly , that it no significative effect on overall closed loop performance . Careful design of the loading factor may act as a safeguard against overload . Considering the model for quantization above , together with the nominal loop description in Section . , it is easy to derive the linear model shown in Figure for the considered . Note that we have made the perfect reconstruction constraint explicit . In Figure , and , and , do , satisfy Assumption . We will refer to this model as the linear model . It will be the basis of the remainder of this paper . In this section we study stability of the linear model for the considered derived in Section . In particular , we characterize all and A that lead to stable linear in an appropriate sense for a given signal to noise ratio . As a , we characterize the minimal signal to noise ratio that one to find and A such that the resulting linear model is stable . We begin by that , a dimensional vector that the of ,, A , A and see Figure , then the evolution be by a linear state space model : where A and are matrices of appropriate that depend on the particular of ,, A , A and . Next , since we are considering a stochastic system , we need an appropriate notion of stability : Definition Mean Square Stability , , The linear system in is Mean Square Stable if and only if there exist a finite and a finite , , both not dependent on the initial state , such that Theorem for Mean Square Stability If hold , and is an independent random variable with finite mean and finite variance matrix , then the linear model in Figure is if and only if A U , and Proof : Define as the variance matrix of . Since the spectral factor of , , to , we lose no generality if we restrict attention to the case where , for every i . e ., if we assume white noise . The general case the same , but an augmented description of the system that additional stable . Consider the state space description of the system under study given by . Standard allow one to conclude see , e .., Chapter in that under our working where and , are defined as and ,, but of . • If the is , then both and are finite and unique . Therefore , that A must be stable . On the other hand , we also see from that ,, i . e ., the stationary variance of , say , must be positive semi definite , finite and unique . Since the nominal loop is stable , a simple calculation that A being stable that both A and A must be stable , and moreover , that is stable . Of course , both A and A must be proper and , on the other hand , is constrained to be strictly proper recall Constraint . Therefore , it that A U and . If A is stable , then it is easy to see that the stationary variance of see also Section where is defined in , and where we have used the fact uncorrelated is such that . the definition of in Therefore , we conclude that , provided A is stable , being positive semi definite , finite and unique is equivalent to . • Since the nominal loop is stable , and A U , we have that A is stable . Therefore , it from that is finite , unique and well defined . If , then the when proving the sufficiency part of this theorem imply that is positive semi definite , unique and finite . the definition of , it then that is positive semi definite , finite and unique . Therefore , is positive semi definite , unique and finite and , since A is to be stable see above , then we have that the equation that the limiting value of , in a finite , unique and positive semi definite solution see , e .., Section . in . Therefore , we have proven that is as . This the proof . The condition for given in Theorem is deceivingly simple . This is due to the fact that the nominal loop is assumed stable and we are on that achieve perfect reconstruction recall Section . . It is relevant to note that does not depend on A . Therefore , one can easily characterize the lower bound on that one to guarantee : Theorem Minimal signal to noise ratio for If hold , and is an independent random variable with finite mean and finite variance matrix , then there exist A and that allow one to guarantee if and only if Proof : It to compute see Theorem . To that end , we employ the in detail in , e .., , , . We first note that , . Define where pi i ,, the set of non minimum phase of that lie strictly outside the unit circle i . e ., the unstable of outside the unit circle . It is clear that , is unitary , and is such that the transfer function to , is and as non minimum phase the on the unit circle of i . e ., the on the unit circle of where we have used orthogonal in L , the fact that both unitary , the fact that Assumption , and basic of the norm . By construction , and is invertible in except for on the unit circle . Elementary see , e .., Chapter in allow one to conclude from that Use of the Residue Theorem and some simple algebra the desired result . ¤¤¤ Theorem a precise condition that the signal to noise ratio to satisfy in order to be able to find a system that , when inserted in the feedback path of a stable nominal loop , the of the resulting linear model . The bound on only on the unstable of , i . e ., on the unstable of the plant and controller . If the plant model is strongly i . e ., can be a stable controller ; see , e .., , then a stable controller in the nominal loop one to find a feedback coder capable of the resulting linear model if and only if where i ,, the set of unstable of . We note that the same conclusion if the controller is stable except for on the unit circle e .., with integral action . If we fix , then must satisfy , which is a fixed constraint in our framework . If it were possible to redesign the controller under the constraint , then one can use the in to establish that the admissible signal to noise ratio must satisfy where is non negative and on the non minimum phase and on the relative degree of the plant model if and only if is minimum phase and relative degree equal to one . We thus conclude that the inclusion of the system one to reduce the on the signal to noise ratio , at least for strong regardless of the plant or relative degree . This reduction may be very significative if , e .., the plant high relative degree . This is an important indication of the that to control . A question that remains open , however , is whether or not there exist different that allow one to recover for any plant . Remark Relationship to prior work In it is proved that is the minimal signal to noise ratio that one to find one degree of freedom that stabilize a given plant model over an additive noise channel with a power constraint . In a second step , the show that a memoryless channel , with a signal to noise ratio that , would have a capacity Cap see , e .., that where is the minimal data rate which is necessary and sufficient to stabilize an system over an error free bit rate limited channel . Equality in is if and only if the plant is minimum phase and a relative degree equal to one . These suggest that signal to noise ratio in one degree of freedom control are , for a restricted class of , consistent with the minimal data rate of . If the plant non minimum phase , or a relative degree than one , then see . It thus that , in these , data rate by signal to noise ratio may be more demanding than those in . Our can be applied to the channel model in as well , provided error free feedback with a unit delay is available from the channel output to the channel input . When doing so , it turns out that is consistent in the sense above with the minimal data rate derived in . Our even if the plant model arbitrary relative degree and arbitrary , as long as is strongly . We thus conclude that , within the framework , the use of feedback is key to achieve and , accordingly , key to make signal to noise ratio consistent with the in . We stress that the issue of existence of feedback from the channel output to the channel input is inconsequential to the set up used in because the channel is error free , as in our case . Note that the assumption of channel feedback been explicitly made for with stochastic see , e .., , , again the in . If channel feedback is removed from the analysis of , then the minimal data for stabilization do not necessarily coincide with those in see Section in . In this section we go beyond stability and focus on how to actually design a feedback system that the impact that the communication channel on closed loop performance , as measured by the steady state variance of the error . The purpose of this section is to define the performance of interest in a precise way . To that end , we consider the linear model in Figure . Straightforward analysis that the error Therefore , if the linear model is and and hold , then the stationary variance of e and is given by where is a spectral factor of the power spectral density of . Since Assumption , is not a given constant ; indeed , it on the variance of . Proceeding as above and the same , it from Figure that We note that , since is assumed to be given , the choice of the i . e ., A and only the second term in , which we denote as Problem Main problem Given a fixed , , a controller and a plant that satisfy Assumption , and exogenous satisfying Assumption , find defined via and A and that achieve or approximate arbitrarily well . We note that all in the formulation of Problem stem from , as in and . We will use the term admissible A resp . admissible to refer to a filter A resp . that the in Problem . Problem is non trivial . Indeed , the much simpler problem of designing A and so as to minimize the steady state variance of ym , when and been only recently exactly see . This is quite surprising given the fact that feedback have been studied extensively see , e .., , , . Unfortunately , the technique employed in does not seem to yield an explicit characterization of the solution in the present situation . Instead of that line of reasoning here , we will derive an iterative approach that is to yield performance that is arbitrarily close to optimum . Before the design procedure , we note that the following : Fact Asymptotic behavior of Assume that the of Problem hold . Then : . If , then unless all exogenous have zero spectral density , in which case A for every admissible A and . . By definition of , we have that . Thus unless either . Since A U and . Fix A U and . In these , and hence , . As a consequence of Fact , we will omit from our subsequent presentation an explicit analysis of the or . The reader can easily verify that the below are consistent with Fact by or . We begin by showing how to choose A , when an admissible is given . To that end we define , for any given admissible , Theorem Optimal A for a given Assume that the of Problem hold and consider a fixed admissible . If is not identically zero , then : Proof : The definition of the norm one to conclude that , for , the following hold : Both and follow and the inequality in note that is always well defined if Assumption , and is not identically zero . To complete the proof we note that is a condition on the magnitude of the filter A . Thus , can always be , to any desired degree of accuracy , by a rational filter in U as . ¤¤¤ Remark Of course , assuming that is not identically zero does not hinder the generality of Theorem see Part in Fact . The characterization of given by Theorem , although explicit , is usually not satisfied by any transfer function in U . This is due to the fact that , except in very special , the th root of the right hand side in is irrational . Nevertheless , as in the proof of Theorem , it is always possible to find a filter in U that a performance that is as close as desired to . In practice , it is usually enough to consider reasonably low order to approximate see also . In this section we address the problem of choosing when an admissible A is given . Consistent with the notation before , We begin by that A can be written in a simpler form as : Fact Equivalent formulation for A Assume that the of Problem hold and consider a fixed A U . Then , Proof : the definition the fact that A is fixed , it is immediate to see that Define a new real variable ,, constrained to belong to ,. With this definition , elementary optimization see , e .., Section . . in allow one to write as where we have used the fact that , by definition of , J for any . The result is now immediate . ¤¤¤ Fact is key to derive the main result in this section . Namely , a one parameter characterization for A and the corresponding optimal . Towards that goal , we begin by considering an auxiliary problem . Define the functional Lemma Solution to auxiliary problem in and suppose that Assumption . the relative degree of , i ,, resp . pi i ,, is the set of non minimum phase resp . unstable of that lie strictly outside the unit circle . . If resp . , then the in is achievable in , if and only if no resp . on the unit circle . . We will proceed as in the proof of Theorem see also . As before , we define via , Q . It is easy to see from that Moreover , the same procedure as in the proof , it is also clear that A A z Q A A Q ¡ A A A Q , where we have used the fact that the relative degree and non minimum phase of are the relative degree and non minimum phase of , that unitary , and that , since A U , is such that A to , is and as non minimum phase the on the unit circle of i . e ., the on the unit circle of . From and it that where , i is an inner factor of and , o is the corresponding outer factor . We note that , since Assumption , no on the unit circle for , . Thus , for those of ,, o U . Therefore , orthogonal as those employed before allow one to write . The result upon that , by definition of and , resp . A to if and only if no on the unit circle resp . on the unit circle . The characterization of given in Lemma an essential role in our subsequent discussion . It is worth that the only critical step when calculating is the inner outer factorization of . Since no at infinity i . e ., is , this factorization can be made with the aid of standard see , e .., , . The next theorem a characterization of the optimal in of . Theorem Optimal for a fixed A Assume that the of Problem hold and consider a fixed A U . Then , In , is defined as : If there does not exist , such that J , then . Otherwise , , where is the unique real in , such that J . . We first show how to solve an auxiliary problem related to the inner optimization problem in The well known for this problem see , e .., , allow one to conclude that the optimal , say , if it is a critical point of J J , where , , and , moreover , J . It is immediate to see that this is equivalent to saying that is a critical point of see , with , and J . is a strictly convex functional and so are J and J . Hence , it an unique critical point given by see . Moreover , the set of in the J versus J plane defined by , when from zero to one , is the set of optimal of the objective problem of simultaneously J and J see , e .., , . This set is a strictly convex and decreasing function when J is seen as function of J . Clearly , the optimal point corresponding to resp . is such that J is minimum resp . J is minimum . Thus , by definition of optimal point , the minimum of J , when J is when J , provided J F . If J F , then the minimum J is when J J F . As a consequence , the optimal solution of the auxiliary problem is given by , where , provided J F , to , and is such that J note that convexity that , in this case , is unique . On the other hand , if J F , then . . We next show how to exploit the above reasoning to prove the result . We first note that , since F J , it is of no use to consider that J F note also that is optimal for the first optimization problem in and , accordingly , constraining J F to be greater than or equal not impede the minimization of . Thus , to exist in , and to be unique . A key feature of this problem is that the optimal of the auxiliary problem considered in Part do not depend on . Thus , in , min , J F is equivalent to , min , if defined in the body of this Theorem does not exist , then pick . It should be clear that the structure of the problem is such that , min , J F . Thus , it to consider , min , . As a consequence , the result . Theorem a one parameter characterization of the optimal and the corresponding minimal cost A , for any admissible A . The scalar parameter can be found any standard line search procedure and , as such , its calculation no additional . This is by the fact that the search for is made over , and that actually in , which is precisely the range of of for which is always defined in see Lemma . In this section we show how to use the in . and . to design a feedback system in an iterative fashion . Of course , one can always choose to fix one of the coder trivial are A or and then use Theorem or to design the free parameter . Obviously , this choice will limit the achievable performance . To exploit the full potential of a feedback system we suggest that one an iterative algorithm such as the following : Algorithm Iterative design procedure For a given plant and controller satisfying Assumption , and a given , proceed as : Pick a tolerance , a transfer function A U and a transfer function F that is admissible . Set A A , F . Set A ,, fix A or , alternatively , fix and set . If at the th iteration A was fixed , then use Theorem to obtain . Set and A ,. Fix . If at the th iteration was fixed , then use Theorem to obtain . Set and A ,. Fix A . It should be clear that it is not certain that Algorithm will converge to the global minimum of . Nevertheless , it is easy to see that , by definition of and , the algorithm the value each iteration . Therefore , Algorithm , necessarily , to a local minimum . Thus , we suggest to use multiple starting so as to find the global minimum . A procedure for getting a good starting point is below . In general , and . Thus , fixing A or and choosing the other filter , will obviously provide a system that closed loop performance when with a non situation . It is also clear that the use of Algorithm one to design that will always outperform that have been designed the in our work in . This is a consequence of the fact that to be identically zero . A more interesting discussion if one the in this paper with the in . In the latter work , it is assumed that is sufficiently high so as to be able to by a second stage , to choose as the minimizer of . A problem with the above approach is that , a , which are high enough to be impossible . In particular , since the procedure in does not take the constraint explicitly into account , the choice for may be not admissible or may be such that A , . Needless to say , this drawback is explicitly in the current paper . It is also clear that choosing A as in and , then , Theorem to choose will always lead to a feedback coder that a error variance that is lower than the one by the in . Of course , if the in are feasible , then they may provide a good starting point for Algorithm . This section a design study that the in this paper . We consider a very simple case that , nevertheless , will allow us to present the main of our proposal . The measurement noise and output disturbance are assumed zero , whilst the reference is considered to have a power spectral density with spectral factor The loading factor is fixed at in all , and the number of quantization ,, b , between and . Since we do not consider the use of channel e .., entropy ; see , , to the rate at which data is sent through the channel in Figure the steady state error variance se see as a function of the number of in Algorithm for two representative of the signal to noise ratio : . and . , which correspond to and , respectively . and refer to that start with A and F . In Case we initially fixed A , whereas in Case we start fixing . Case to that start with the in . We note that to be greater than . in order for the proposal in to be admissible . Accordingly , we Figure : error as function of the number of in Algorithm see text for . Case in Figure when . . It can be seen that rapid convergence of Algorithm and , more interestingly , that the limiting performance does not depend on the order in which the are calculated or on the initial condition . Thus , local minima related do not seem to play a role in this example . In Figure we have three . The first of these point to the performance without and A . The second point to the performance when the optimal system in . The third point to the performance the approximately optimal in . The show that is , indeed , necessary to achieve the best possible loop performance . Compare point with , e .., the value of se for . It is also possible to see that use of Algorithm that perform better than our previous in , , which is consistent with the discussion at the end of Section . . Compare and with the limiting value for se . It is also interesting to mention that , for , the performance provided by the in is substantially closer to the limiting value of se than the case shown in Figure . This suggest , as before , that the in , when feasible , provide good starting for the iterative procedure here . We end this section by the behavior of the error variance as a function of the channel bit rate . The are in Figure , where Nominal performance to the performance by the nominal loop without quantization , No empirical to when no is employed i . e ., when A and , Opt . empirical to with the by Algorithm after , and Opt . analytical to the corresponding made the simplified noise model for quantization . One can see that , as , the effects of quantization vanish as . Interestingly , the made our model turn out to be very accurate for every bit rate : indeed , for the relative are of less than and , for , , the relative are around . We note that turns out to be non admissible for . Accordingly , This paper a methodology to design feedback that encode plant output in a control situation data rate limited . a fixed signal to noise ratio additive noise model for quantization , we have shown how to iteratively design the of a feedback system so as to minimize the impact of quantization on the closed loop error . Our show that feedback quantization are beneficial when to simpler in the literature . An interesting by product of our in the characterization of the signal to noise ratio compatible with stabilization . We have shown that , for a given signal to noise ratio , the class of that are when feedback is employed is significatively than the class of that are when no is used . This result the door to investigating other control and feedback and the associated signal to noise ratio . A very interesting extension of the present work in multiple input multiple output . In that case , it is worth exploring how may help the well known performance that arise when constraining the structure of the controller see , e .., , . A second immediate extension in the problem of joint controller and coder design . The study of how to apply similar to the case of prone to data loss is also interesting see preliminary work in . Consider a a on and extensible to . If X and X is achievable in , i . e ., if such that X , then , X . On the contrary , if such that X , then defined as above should be understood as limn , where is a sequence in whose limit to such that limn X . Therefore , if we write and , it is implicit that one can find a sequence as above . In these , it is clear that one can always pick that is as close to X as desired . ﻿ We present an based model for the gain of an indoor antenna array . This to the of the model , as applied to outdoor indoor links . Our model is applicable to a few adjacent in an system such as . We find that as much as out of of antenna gain are attainable even in rich indoor scattering . At the same time , no fade margin is when the array . the antenna . To provide a reference for the we consider a simple propagation model , which is theoretically and via simulation . This model is found to match our empirical very well . Index Channel , directive , gain reduction factor , outdoor indoor wireless links . have been used to improve received signal power since the beginning of . However the specification of an antenna effectiveness in such as improvement of signal strength and reduction of interference is typically for propagation devoid of or reflecting , i . e ., under free space . The more recent appearance of cellular wireless service , in propagation where the presence of is the rule rather than the exception . Relatively little been on the interaction between propagation and the antenna gain . The decrement in achievable antenna gain due to local scattering was originally defined in as the Gain Reduction Factor . This factor was as a location dependent random variable and its statistical were for a specific environment , namely suburban outdoor to outdoor links . The very fast growth in wireless traffic in urban forced base coverage to those of , , for which the may no longer hold . While short range outdoor to indoor links for static or nomadic have been , the effect of directional on those links received very little attention . In fact , most have been based on the use of . Moreover as stated in , path loss prediction are much greater when directional instead of . Recent in antenna design the use of have made it practical to consider the application of in relatively small , such as those used in wireless local area . Such will allow taking advantage of propagation where the dominant lie in an angular range that is much narrower than the array . To the best of our knowledge , there is no general model available to describe angular spread when indoor wireless service is provided from outdoor bases . The actual gains achievable with directional in this setting therefore an empirical study similar to what was in for suburban links . This is the main focus of the work we describe here . We provide the first statistical description of the for this type of environment . The Mean Effective Gain , was in as a useful single parameter to describe the impact of the antenna on the link budget for , primarily for mobile links . This is defined as the ratio between the spatial average power received by the antenna and the sum of the average that would have been received in the same environment by two isotropic , vertically and horizontally . A theoretical method is in to analyze the of a mobile antenna . A general expression based on a statistical model of incident is and empirical data was at to validate the model . A statistical model for incident is also , where model derived and measured of are for street links at . . An analysis of some fundamental of the and the corresponding physical is in for theoretical Rice channel . In contrast to the , as a random variable , the is an average value . . Personal use is permitted , but republication redistribution permission . See : index . for more information . An approach based on modeling from the gain pattern of an antenna as a result of propagation is in . This is defined as the Effective Directivity Antenna Model , which a bin fitted stochastic model to correct the nominal antenna pattern . The based model in the above was for specific directive in outdoor outdoor and indoor indoor links , . and . are carried out to show that the model more accurate path loss prediction than the when directive are used . The however do not focus on the reduction of available gain for beam indoor when are from outdoor bases , as we discuss here . The originally defined in , was subsequently in but the corresponding statistical model is based on empirical data collected only in suburban links , . The approach is based on the arrival distribution of power density which from our methodology , as will be in the next section . Short range outdoor indoor wireless are links for which there is still a lack of empirical , . Several such as and the therein have the subject of path loss characterization for that in some are similar to ours . However , links with directional are only considered in and in . A comparison of maximum received power directive and dipole is in , but this work does not include a statistical characterization of the gain difference between both antenna . In , and of outdoor indoor links that include directive are , but this work does not include a comparison of received power for different antenna . The main objective of this paper is to evaluate the effectiveness of steerable directional at the indoor user terminal in typical short range , fixed wireless , outdoor indoor service . We propose a statistical model for the of links , applicable for instance to a group of within the coherence in transmission . These are important since antenna gain may compensate for the propagation loss disadvantage of indoor outdoor as to indoor indoor links , opening up a much application space for cellular service . The were carried out at . a transmitter and a carefully power measuring receiver . The frequency used is the same as in the fixed wireless service . A total of different links were tested in the urban in Section . The links included in the relative position of outdoor and indoor and variation in path , ranging from to . The remainder of this paper is organized as : Section the theoretical background . Section the measurement hardware and methodology . Section statistical based on our empirical data . Finally , . For convenience we assume the outdoor base to be the transmitter and the indoor user the receiver . The receiver is connected to a directional antenna , capable of searching in azimuth for maximum power . The received power at the antenna in a wireless link with properly can be expressed as where is the transmit power , and are the transmit and receive antenna gains in free space , for feeder cable between the , the transmitter and the receiver and is the path loss associated with the propagation environment . Expression if the angular spread of the is much smaller than the antenna , as may be the case for a base antenna above clutter . For an indoor antenna surrounded by clutter this directivity gain will in general no longer hold . While the antenna can be in the direction of the arrival , its radiation pattern will attenuate from other , which may be by a beam antenna , in particular an element . Further , as in , we define the as the decrease in gain advantage of a directive over an antenna , due to the presence of clutter . Let G and G be the nominal free space antenna gains of a directive and an antenna respectively . We denote as the actual in clutter gain advantage of the directive antenna when for maximum received power . Then , To estimate for a given link , we measure the received power an in azimuth antenna . Let this power be . For exactly the same antenna and transmit power , we repeat the measurement with the directive antenna , rotating it in search of the maximum power . The difference in received power is then the in clutter gain advantage of the directive antenna , , at that spatial position . Since and are the position dependent random received by the , the is by the difference between the spatial of a directive and an antenna , both at the same position , by the difference in free space gains . To establish a basis that can serve as a reference for comparison with our empirical , we use a very simple model for our propagation environment , which nevertheless proved to be quite accurate , as we will see in Section . This model , in that at each indoor measurement location a very large number of equal power at the receive antenna . These are distributed uniformly over the complete azimuth angular range with phases distributed uniformly from to p . In addition to these scattered , a single dominant from one direction , as in Fig . . The average power ratio of the dominant wave over the total of the scattered is the factor . We now consider a directional antenna rotated in azimuth . For simplicity we assume that the directive and the have the same vertical gain and that the horizontal gain pattern for the directive antenna is constant within the and zero elsewhere . If this antenna is pointed in a direction that does not include the dominant path , then the received voltage will be distributed , provided that one can still assume that a large number of fall within the . On the other hand , when the directive antenna the dominant , then the received voltage will be Rice distributed . However the factor for this distribution will be times that the voltage received by the antenna . This is because the dominant wave is subject to the horizontal antenna gain of the directive antenna , while the scattered power is on average unchanged , as the gain increase is exactly offset by the reduction in number of the received diffuse . With these we can statistically describe the ratio of the power received both of . For the antenna at random in the room the output voltage envelope is a Rice distributed random variable by the local factor . We now consider that at the same position the directive antenna is rotated in search of the maximum power , where antenna , with the antenna expressed in . Then the directive antenna output voltage can be written as , where the collection of random i of random and one Rice distributed random variable with a factor equal to . It is reasonable to assume that these random are independent , since they arrive from non angular . From this we can obtain the statistical characterization of the ratio of between the directive and the . As an example we will consider the limiting situation where . We note that in this case the directive antenna will only be able to choose among distributed random and will thus act as a branch selection combiner . This us to use well known . We characterize the statistics of the ratio , as it from that this will determine the statistics of the . the derived for an branch selection combiner , we see that the Probability Density Function of the output power , where we have assumed that the average power for each direction is unity . This can be done without loss of generality since we will only consider power . For the antenna the of output power will then have an exponential distribution with unit average . We will also assume that this random variable is independent of the preceding . Given the statistics of and we now obtain the ratio distribution for . the version , we find that the of for the case can be calculated as The above integral can in this case be in closed form . again we the u and from it the corresponding Cumulative Distribution Function In the above example the directive antenna can only offer a diversity gain . The case nonzero can be the same procedure , instead of in and . However the resulting integral corresponding to does not yield a closed form expression and is thus best numerically . We note that when the these must not be , since the model must consider that the average received are not equal as the vary with angular position . We will in general use when to the random power ratio , given that the factor is equal to . As the is equal to by the ratio of nominal antenna gains , the statistics of the are readily from those of We plot in Fig . the of the for the , , , under the assumption . We have here again assumed that both type of have the same gain in the vertical plane so that . The were calculated for the case , and numerical integration nonzero . In addition we the previously model generating the corresponding random . The were identical . We see that for small of , such as in our , the model that the will be negative with non zero probability i . e ., the array gain advantage can appear to be higher than in free space . This to the condition where the antenna is subject to a large fade while the directive array at the same position can combat such a fade angular selection diversity . Under the we , even for as low as , which a significant fade probability for Fig . . of the for the , , , under the assumption . reception , the directive antenna would almost in every case select the dominant direction and as a result only exhibit very shallow . Thus , we have a combination of classic deterministic gain as well as statistical reduction of fade margin , which can result in an overall gain higher than in free space . Throughout this work we consider that the beam scanning of the directive antenna is only in azimuth and that the elevation of the is than the corresponding angular spread and hence the vertical gain is not reduced . Our approach to calculating the is different from the one originally in see in , which is based on a transmission much than the typical coherence of the links considered . The use of the real valued angle of arrival distribution of power and the antenna power gains used in is under such due to the effect over frequency . Instead , for short range links the coherence is much , in the range of . We thus here consider the case of a transmission , for example a range of within the channel coherence . Although the definition of the is not dependent on the relation between the transmission and channel coherence , in the case the approach used in would not be practical . In fact , calculating the received power from the angle of arrival distribution of the electric field would require phase information , and the complex antenna voltage gain . Instead we found it much simpler to directly measure received power with various an dipole used as reference and to apply . The measurement system of a . continuous wave transmitter and a purpose built receiver coupled to a power meter . The outdoor base station into the antenna terminal of a . gain dipole . The receiver is . This is wide enough to capture any frequency dispersion that the transmission , induced for example by vegetation movement . The measurement procedure is essentially the same already in , a computer to control antenna position and the synchronized acquisition of power . For each antenna position consecutive were . These were then to remove residual temporal , which were typically less than . . Before each measurement we calibration to assure that the transmitter and the receiver were operating with their nominal and gains . In all field the received power was at least above the noise floor . were carried out at urban type in and , Chile . We selected where the base terminal could be positioned at a range of to from the indoor antenna . This space was in some by with and no higher than . Three were chosen in , one of them on the campus of and two in private . The fourth location was the campus of Maria in , which a wide range of indoor that and relatively large . A schematic of one of them is shown in Fig . where we also specify the outdoor base and indoor subscriber unit . Fig . the setup of the indoor measurement system for the analysis of both small scale and statistics . Fig . . Measurement configuration for the case showing the on axis rotating system and the . rotating arm . At these we measured a total of links that to two of , line of sight through a window or non line of sight when the direct path was blocked . This blockage included foliage of , small or a wall . The thickness of the foliated obstruction was typically in the range of . to . The construction was of the brick and mortar type , with non . Window sizes varied in width in the range of . to . and in height from . to . . The minimum window area was m . All were made by the outdoor antenna that the wireless at . height . We firstly at fully our test . This involved the receiver to the dipole antenna on a . length rotating arm stepwise in azimuth , which a displacement of approximately between successive antenna . The power in a rotation at each placement were used to calculate the spatially path loss at that range and to generate the statistics of with respect to that average . The size of the region for the spatial average is well within the shadow fade correlation distance in previous work , , . In fact the in the literature , corresponding to indoor , are in the range of to m . This was repeated over a variety of in our test . The our statistical data with that of typical path loss . We note that these were only at the propagation environment and that spatial was not used in the , as will be below . To directly measure the of the as in the previous section , we used a platform capable of rotating the about their axes in with no displacement other than rotation . Power were acquired as before at each angular position . Four of were used indoor , an . gain dipole used as reference and three different directional . The first was a . gain patch antenna with elevation and azimuth half power of and respectively . The second was a . gain horizontal linear array of four vertically polar with elevation and azimuth half power of and respectively . The third was a . gain array of four vertically with elevation and azimuth half power of . The corresponding horizontal gain for the directive , measured in an chamber , are in Fig . . At each measurement location , the nominally antenna was rotated exactly as the directive to average out minor gain less than . Care was taken to place the of in exactly the same position at the beginning of each rotation and this was repeated for a wide range of as will be later . We power for the full rotation , which in the case of the directional us to obtain the maximum signal strength as well as the direction of arrival of the diverse resolvable . The computer measurement procedure is accurate to of one degree and us to verify that were repeatable , i . e ., that successive at any given location would yield the same result . This section the of the and the statistical data derived from them . We start by our measurement environment from a propagation point of view . To this effect we the data collected with the rotating arm in our to model average path loss and small scale fade statistics . The extensively used log normal model that the spatially path loss in may be as : between the and , d is the free space path loss at a distance d in , is the SUMMARY OF PATH LOSS STANDARD THE AND path loss exponent and is a zero mean distributed random variable in with standard deviation . We applied this model to our data after out over one rotation of the arm that the antenna . As conventionally done , we chose d . of the model in , multiple or choosing the intercept point d different from the free space path loss did not provide a measurably better fit . In addition , we the of the small scale with respect to the local . As , we found that the fit to was very good . We show in Table I the model . The were below . in of the for both and links to a very rich environment . It that our test environment is not by large shadow fade related power , particularly for the case , but that it is rich in propagation , as for an indoor setting . Consistent with the above , we found the indoor propagation environment to be rich in over a broad angular range . The dominant energy in general from the direction of the nearest window . Moreover , when pointing the antenna in the general direction of the dominant path , angular in the range of a typically in a received power pattern that closely that of the specific antenna used . This may be seen in Fig . , where we plotted received power . angle for the case of the patch array in . To avoid a very figure we only show chosen at random among the total of . These were to their maximum power and the angle at which this power was was set to zero . We also plot the antenna gain pattern and the average per angle from all . It can be seen that the dominant path is not resolvable into separate by the we used and that the angular spread of these dominant is narrower than the of the directive . Other were typically to arrive as wall from than the used , as seen in the above figure . This can be with of the propagation model in Section , assuming the rotation of a directional antenna with the same gain pattern as that used in our . Since in this case our are exclusively based on simulation , we chose to also include the randomness of the factor , which for our links was approximately uniformly distributed in the range to . . Thus in Fig . we show from . to . and the average of . As seen , the model match the behavior quite well , although in contrast with the , the average power for the is not constant at angular outside the dominant direction . It may be that in our , the angular distribution of the the direction of the dominant path . To further describe the angular of the , we the angle of arrival of the signal , with the angle of the straight line with . The of this difference is shown in Fig . for both the and . As seen , for links the dominant on a close to direct path from the base . We found that for of the angular deviation was no than . , i . e ., about half a . Instead , for links the angular range for of was . . The latter value is by the angular difference of between the direct path and that of the nearest window in our , which for of was less than . Alternatively , we found that when considering of , aiming along a direct path in a power reduction reaching up to of . for and for links . Fig . . of the difference between the angle of arrival of the signal and the angle of the straight path between and . Our show that , as previously in suburban , the may be quite accurately as a random variable . Fig . the cumulative distribution for the case of the array in and . In the same figure we also show the when the model in Section , considering of . and . for and respectively . Here , the model based need to take into account that the vertical gains of the and the directive are not equal . As a result the increase in the factor that the directive antenna voltage only to the horizontal gain advantage over the antenna or equivalently its horizontal reduction , a factor of for this case . On the other hand the total gains of each antenna were considered when calculating the they receive . As seen , despite the simplicity of the model , it measurement accurately , the error being negligible at the and probability , while at probability it is . for and to . for . We have the corresponding for the , as they are quite similar . In contrast with , the exhibit a considerable likelihood of negative i . e ., the array gain advantage would appear to be higher than in free space . As already , this at where the is subject to a large fade , which the angular selection diversity gain of the directive antenna can significantly reduce . In negative are not possible since the small scale have been out in frequency . The of the best fit random the for all is by their mean and standard deviation in Table . Although our propagation are different , we fitted the model in to these average . The expression used is where is the half power azimuth antenna in . The best fit for A in Table . As in Fig . , the fit is quite good , although the actual average in our case are considerably lower than those measured in suburban . Furthermore , we measured an increasing average with , but this is much less than for the outdoor case . This may be due to the scalar integration of for the case . vector addition of in our case . Therefore in the case the monotonically the total received power , whereas in our case excluding secondary reflected can in some be of benefit . Another manifestation of this phenomenon is the fact that we measured a significant fraction of negative , which contribute to lowering the average . We also found a relatively large standard deviation of the with no statistically significant variation with as to . This is consistent with our angular spread , which is typically dominated by a strong component that is narrow with the directive antenna . Therefore when aiming these towards the signal , there will be little difference among them resulting from the effect of secondary . Equivalently , all directive see the same strongly dominant , from which they extract power in accordance with their respective effective . The variation of the , which is similar for all directive , may instead reflect the fact that in our measurement the antenna used as the common reference is subject to considerable Rice spatial fading . We also study the possible correlation between the and the shadow plus small scale fade at the location , as measured by the dipole . It cannot be assumed a that the is a random variable independent of these . We calculated the total of the dipole with respect to the average path loss regression as well as the for the same measurement point . The correlation coefficient between these random is then easily . We found that for all used and both and , the ranged between . and . . The negative in all the fact that deeply faded for the dipole antenna will be those where the directive can offer the benefit , due to angular diversity gains . The negative correlation between the spatial and the , that a directive array is capable of partially that would affect a dipole at the same position . We discuss this further in what . To illustrate the actual gains that were with directive we plot in . and the received power for our with the array and the dipole , considering the and separately . We recall that for the dipole these do not include spatial , while for the directive they represent the peak received power over a rotation at the same measurement position of the dipole . This is consistent with a scenario where the user the antenna at a random position , without searching to optimize Fig . . Received power power of . Straight and dashed represent the best fit linear regression for a dipole and for a array respectively . Fig . . Received power power of . Straight and dashed represent the best fit linear regression for a dipole and for a array respectively . location and hence , small scale Rice fade must be included in the link budget . In these we also include the linear for both of , considering an intercept at based on free space propagation with the respective . The least fit are in Table . As seen , the are consistent with those for when out small scale . In the case , which is dominated by small scale , the negative slope is marginally , as the lack of spatial deep when measuring power in . The of the difference of received power , with respect to the regression , were in both very close to . The difference between the two regression in the distance range where our were concentrated is as almost identical to the nominal gain difference of the after the average . SUMMARY OF RECEIVED POWER STANDARD THE AND We observe that the standard deviation of received power is about the same for the directive and the dipole . While the antenna array may benefit from fade reduction due to diversity effects , this is more or less by the variability of the . As a result , similar link fade can be used for both antenna . In summary , we found that indoor able to search for the signal with a directive antenna instead of an one , can achieve very significant . For example a nominally . gain antenna will in a indoor setting be able to provide an average . power gain . At the same time , the choice of a directive over an antenna over does not increase the . As already noted , part of the gain is attributable to classic and part to the angular diversity advantage of the directive antenna . As a reference we note that for a purely fading environment , the average diversity gain of the antenna , would have been only . , corresponding to a branch selection combiner . The of an extensive measurement campaign , covering a variety of short range outdoor indoor links , show that significant power gains are available to indoor a steerable directive antenna . For the case that we considered , the antenna gains that should be used for link budget are within . of the nominal , free space gains for example . instead of . for the array . Moreover , while the directive exhibit considerable randomness in the , they also benefit from angular diversity and the combination of both effects in fade statistics that are very similar to those of the antenna . Thus , the use of a directive antenna indoors an increase in average received power , without the need for increasing the fade margin . The wish to acknowledge the help provided by . Hector in the design and calibration of the used in this work . ﻿ We derive closed form for the statistics of the power gain as a function of frequency of microwave indoor . We obtain our within a framework that is general enough to be compatible with several popular channel , such as the channel model and those by the . . a and . . a task . As in all these , our channel description is based upon and with possibly mixed and random . Our consist of closed form for the second order statistics of the channel power frequency response , where statistical involve over ray and arrival times . These reveal that the of the spectral power gain between any two and to zero as the difference between these to infinity if and only if the cluster arrival rate goes to infinity . They also show that the variance to squared mean ratio of the narrow band power gain exactly the same behavior with respect to the center frequency . We then use these to obtain closed form for the variance and the second order moment of the aggregate channel power gain over any given interval of . This us to express the channel spectral diversity as a function of model and . In addition , we illustrate how these allow one to devise automatic cluster identification which , from empirical of the second order spectral statistics of the channel power gain , can confirm or deny the existence of in a given scenario . Index Fading , channel model , statistical channel modeling wireless channel allow one to predict the statistics of radio propagation over an ensemble of with similar . This is particularly useful in complex , heterogeneous , and time , such as office , residential , and industrial indoor . One of the most popular for indoor wireless is that in , which as the basis for several other channel . Building upon it , the . . a task group accepted a channel model for indoor , and similar have been adopted for the . . a standard . Similar to the model , the . . a and . . a channel consist of a discrete time description of the impulse response of a wireless channel , in which are grouped into . Some of the useful time domain delay statistics of wireless channel are the power delay profile , the average delay , and the delay , which , under suitable , allow one to determine spectral statistics such as coherence and average power gain . These , which are associated with second order statistics of the channel impulse or frequency response , have been extensively and in the literature . Another set of stochastic of wireless , which received relatively less attention , is those derived from the second order statistics of the channel power frequency response i . e ., its squared frequency response magnitude , which is by . An early analysis of these statistics and their application can be found in , where it is that the transmission over two with the right frequency spacing may benefit from the negative correlation between each of the received . Simplified for the spatial and spectral of and for its power over a frequency interval are in , which are then via . Building upon this result and , it been possible to assess fading depth statistics and relate them to the and to some of the propagation environment , . . Personal use is permitted , but republication redistribution permission . See : index . for more information . Although the of the second order statistics of are helpful in the performance of wireless communication , closed form for these statistics further . First and naturally , these closed form can be substituted into other , thus one to relate them with performance , which are also in closed form . Second , explicit parametric will provide useful insight into the relationship between the performance of wireless communication and certain . In particular , the second order statistics of allow one to refine probabilistic drawn from first order statistics alone . Moreover , if the power received over some band is known to distribute according to some parametric probability density function , then the first and second order statistics of this power one to identify , in some , the of the distribution . This it possible to calculate fade depth statistics from the second order statistics of . In this regard , it was already noted in and that the fade depth as the width of . In relation to this question , and an information theoretic approach and measured data , it been shown in that the number of significant of the covariance matrix of the random channel impulse response and , hence , the diversity order of the channel scale approximately linearly with the . This increase in diversity , which to the reduction of the relative channel power variance as the , been to reach a saturation point , , . explicit for this channel power variance as a function of would allow one to predict the associated saturation and relate it to environmental . Available closed form that allow one to analytically obtain the second order statistics of are rather limited . Although the analysis in and does obtain some intermediate closed form , the actual evaluation of these statistics is carried out by . In addition , one of the underpinning the in and is the between the and arrival times of , which is known to contradict channel , . Under the assumption of uncorrelated and arrival times , and considering uniformly distributed arrival times , closed form for the of have been derived in . Exact closed form for all the joint between and , for any and , as a function of the of the channel impulse response have been found in , assuming that component are independent jointly complex and that arrival times are fixed . However , although popular channel such as the model consider complex component , other amplitude have been in the literature see , e .., . Moreover , the conditional independence assumption in does not hold for channel where the impulse response , such as the and its several , . In a recent paper , analytical for the of the channel frequency response squared magnitude and the variance of the power over any frequency band have been derived for the . . a channel model , conditioned to fixed and given ray and cluster arrival times . The corresponding statistics over random arrival times were via . To the best of the knowledge , no closed form are available in the literature for second order unconditioned statistics of the spectral power gain of wireless channel such as the . . a and . . a , as well as for the other like . In this paper , we derive closed form exact for the second order statistics of for a general class of of the channel model . This class , as special , those accepted by the . . a task group and the . . a channel modeling subgroup , , . Unlike , our include considering the randomness of both ray and arrival times . As in all like , our channel description is based upon and , with different power decay among and within . Our analysis framework is general enough to encompass model such as mixed within , as well as in which the first ray of each cluster statistics different from the other these two are considered in , , and . To this end , we first derive , in Section , a general , exact , and closed form expression for the of . This expression is determined by four , corresponding to the second and fourth order moment delay of the cluster and ray by their respective arrival . We use these to analyze the effect of a finite infinite number of , as well as the of only one cluster or , equivalently , no at all . We then use the former result to obtain , in Section , a expression for the variance of the channel power gain over any given interval of . Our predict a positive lower bound for the ratio between the variance of and its squared mean . This bound only as the arrival rate of in the model to infinity , which is a result that is confirmed via . Some preliminary on this topic were in . In addition , the allow one to devise an automatic cluster identification algorithm , which is capable of or the presence of in an ensemble of channel impulse . This algorithm is shown in an example in can be considered an alternative to other cluster identification , such as those in and . Here , we formulate the wireless channel model framework to be throughout this paper . The idea is to establish a framework that is general enough to encompass most of the in the available literature . With that idea in mind , and before proceeding , we will first review some of the salient of several of the model , from which we will then define the set of that our will be based upon . In all and of the model , the channel is by the following random impulse response , : is the random arrival time of the path or ray in the cluster , Ti is the random arrival time of the cluster , and ti , is the random delay of the path in the cluster relative to Ti . Cluster and relative arrival times are ordered , i . e ., Ti i and ti , ti , i . By definition , the cluster with its first ray ; thus Each random coefficient ai , in the amplitude of the path in cluster i . These random are formed as : Each is a random variable the amplitude of the cluster , whereas each real valued random variable ai , the amplitude or gain of the component or ray within the cluster relative to that cluster amplitude . The meaning of the random pi , in on whether a complex or real , representation is used . For the former , pi , , where fi , are uniformly independent and identically distributed i . i .. over , , , . For the real representation , which is as more suitable for , pi , are binary random taking from , with equal probability . In both To establish a framework to encompass the various of the like channel present in , , and and possible future , we will formulate now the least restrictive set of under which our analysis and are valid . To do so , the following three are necessary . Definition Bounded Density Process : We will state that a sequence of random arrival times , with xi i , is bounded density with the following . There a constant such that , for every that is sufficiently small In other , condition in the given definition that the time just after an arrival at and , hence , the arrival density at , at most , on the value of . Definition Sequence i . i .. Under Another Sequence : Let be a bounded density process , with x possibly being equal to . We will say that a sequence of random is i . i . under if the following two are satisfied . Notice that condition in Definition to the conditional independence between and arrival times by all channel considered in , , , and , except the . . a model for industrial under in and . Similarly , taking as the cluster or relative ray and as the cluster or relative ray arrival times , condition all the amplitude considered in , , and , the in which the amplitude of the first ray or cluster a special form , as in body surface to body surface , . . and body surface to external , . . in . We will need one more definition to treat arrival time differently from plain , such as mixed in . To this end , we introduce the following single and joint arrival density . Definition Arrival Density : Let be a bounded density sequence of arrival times , with x possibly being equal to zero . For any , denote the number of in falling inside where , for , . We define the single and joint arrival density of as One case in which arrival times do not conform to a process is in the model in , which is further considered in and . In that case , within each cluster are as mixed ; in which case , the ray times are i . i .. with the following : the given , we can now establish the scope of validity of our by of the following assumption . Assumption : Cluster and ray arrival times and are random and as . , ,..., a , pi ,, unless i and b , ai ,, unless i c where probabilistic independence , and the chain notation a a Ti is a bounded density sequence , with T that is possibly equal to zero , i . i . times exponentially distributed with exponent , and arrival density and ,. ti , m is a bounded density sequence with ti , and arrival density and , for every i . is i . i .. under , with order moment delay profile , as shown in a at the bottom of the page , for , . is i . i .. upon , with order moment delay profile , as shown in b at the bottom of the page , where , for every i . Notice that , in the in Assumption , and , , capture the moment delay between and within , respectively , without taking arrival into account . In turn , the single and joint arrival of are by and ,, whereas the single and joint relative arrival of are given by and ,, respectively . The and in Assumption are satisfied for all the channel in , , and . Indeed , by choosing cluster and ray arrival times as , with each ai , conditioned to ti , being distributed with second moment g , and deterministic Ai with the form Ai b Ti ,, , we obtain the widely used model . A similar choice with distributed Ai and ai the model by the . . a task group excluding its large scale fading term . The decay of the by can be also chosen to match those that the . a standard for high in some scenario such as office and industrial . and a is Mixed do not Give Rise to a Mixed Distribution : It is worth at this point that the mixed , which are by the conditional given in , do not give rise to what is known as a mixed distribution . More precisely , if the random exponent selection in place after each arrival , then the probability any unit length time interval , cannot be written as , where the probability mass function with parameter . The exact probability distribution been derived by the first author in a work currently in preparation . Another assumption that will facilitate the forthcoming analysis is related to the number of and . Although in , as in , , and , the number of and the number of within each cluster are finite , we will consider infinitely many and per cluster . As acknowledged in , the latter choice is more realistic . Of course , this assumption that the decay fast enough with increasing delay . We will make this requirement precise by assuming that the conditional of the defined in a and b satisfy with ai , and ti , as defined in Section A . In addition , as in , we will adopt a real model for the impulse response ; hence , the pi , in are i . i .. random taking the or with equal probability . This is done mainly to simplify the notation , and it is worth that all forthcoming also hold for the complex representation . All that is is that and Assumption hold . A deterministic frequency dependent gain for each ray , which is a feature in , , and , can be easily incorporated to our model by simply multiplying by the squared magnitude of this gain . For ease of notation , and because the effects of this factor on the resulting statistics can be easily added afterward , we will not include it in our . In the following and under Assumption , we will derive the exact closed form for the second order statistics of and of the channel power over any given frequency interval as a function of the moment delay b , b , g , and g . Here , we will obtain closed form for the mean , the , and the coefficient of over any interval of angular . These rely on several technical , which can be found in the Appendix . From and the zero mean and independence of the pi established in , it is easy to verify that Thus , the value of is the same for all , being equal to the product of the average energy of the cluster Ai and the ray relative ai ,. The following theorem , which is the main result of this paper , an exact closed form expression for , in of the arrival density , , , and and the moment delay b , b , g , and g defined in Assumption . Theorem : . Define the effective moment delay profile Proof : See the Appendix . Remark : Theorem that the variance of the channel power gain the same variation with as does its O , O with O . Since the overall behavior of the latter is to decrease as O , it that the variability of the channel power gain is smaller at higher . Notice that this reduction does not come from the frequency dependence affecting each component which is typical of real indoor propagation since we have not included it in our model . However , had this dependence been included , the variance to squared mean ratio of would still exhibit the decay with by Theorem . Instead , the origin of this behavior can be more intuitively understood by looking at in the Appendix and by that E is independent of . In , if we choose , then T T becomes the only frequency dependent term . Now , T is a sum of of the random . At , T turns into a sum of . By contrast , if we let increase so that the of the random extend smoothly over an interval that is several times than p , then the phases of the will be approximately distributed uniformly over , p . This will reduce each of the in the sum . Thus , as , and so does E . Remark : If the effective moment delay and are smooth , then all the frequency dependent in vanish if to infinity while keeping , , leaving only . This that the between two infinitely distant frequency is greater than zero , which , at first sight , may seem . Nevertheless , although this to be the first time that such behavior is proven to exist for like channel , it is consistent with the saturation of the channel diversity order as the , as in and . Further treatment of this phenomenon is in B and . As will be in the following , this nonzero asymptotic is due to that the arrival rate of is finite . Infinitely Many : Suppose the arrival of and are scaled by and , respectively , to obtain arrival Let us also suppose that this is done while the original so that the total impulse response power is , which one to scale g and b by and , respectively . This that g and b are scaled by and , respectively . Denote the resulting scaled moment profile by , and . Substituting them into , the behavior of the involved in the frequency independent part of as cluster and ray going to infinity is given by the following : , if the cluster arrival rate to infinity and the right hand side of b is zero . With this , as , in the case in which have which , B B and if the first cluster randomly i . e ., if , then the of the simpler form squared magnitude of the and the at and . Only One Cluster No : Consider the case in which do not exhibit the presence of . This situation can be under the framework defined by Assumption by supposing that there is only one cluster with deterministic arrival time T and amplitude A , and such that its first ray at time t , . To ensure that there are no other , we may take E Ak . With these , we obtain , and , Nonzero Asymptotic : As previously in Remark , Theorem that , for finite cluster arrival , the of , i . e ., , , to a positive value as i . e ., if O to , and not to zero . To the best of our knowledge , this is the first time that this result is derived or revealed , at least for an like channel model . A simple and intuitive explanation of this phenomenon is provided at the beginning of Section , in of the variance of the aggregate channel power gain over a given band . It is worth that such asymptotic behavior cannot be if one the of the complex frequency response , i . e ., by looking at the second order statistics of instead of those of . Indeed , by the independence a and d and then Lemma , it becomes easy to show that This simple expression which we believe to be novel , that , if the moment delay of and within them are smooth , then lim E . The correlation coefficient of , which is as , , is given by It was already shown that , for any given smooth moment delay profile , the between two and O to zero as O if the cluster arrival density goes to infinity . We shall see in Section A that even when this arrival density is finite , , O if the moment delay change so that the number of with a significant amplitude to infinity . Here , we will use Theorem to derive closed form for the mean and the variance of the total channel power over any given frequency band , i . e ., The variance of the channel power over be directly from the of as Before proceeding , it is worth that readily that , if , u is bounded , then since E linearly with . This one to provide a simple and intuitive explanation for the fact that , u i . e ., the of does not vanish when the two , u are infinitely distant from one another . Recall from theorem that , when , the total impulse response power . Then , if the impulse response is amplitude by a finite number of cluster , it is clear that the ratio variance of impulse response power over the square of the impulse response power will not be zero . In view of , this will imply that . That is , the of between a pair of infinitely distant will not be zero whenever the total number of with random amplitude remains finite . As , this an alternative and more intuitive explanation to what was already in Section B . We now return to the variance of . From , , can be written as the change of O u , u and along diagonal over the square , ,, we obtain We note that is a measure of the fluctuation of the received power over a wireless channel and that the latter its fade statistics . The fact that fade depth with channel been in the literature , both from empirical data see , e .., and from , . However , a closed form formula fade depth and the classical channel model used here have , to the best of our knowledge , not been to date . The derived allow us to directly deal with this issue , provided that the fading distribution can be fully determined from its second moment an assumption that was successfully applied in . The explicit dependence between in the following example . Here , we will illustrate the application of the in and to the classical model . In particular , we will show that our analytical found in and accurately predict the of and the variance of the channel power gain over any given band . In addition , we will show how the presence of can be confirmed or by the statistics of and the derived in this paper . In the model , the ai , are distributed conditioned to ti ,, and the Ai are deterministic exponentially . The of cluster and ray are given by where the last equation since the fourth moment E x of a distributed random related to its second order moment as E x E x . Both cluster and relative ray times are exponentially i . i .. with and , respectively . In addition , the arrival times of the first cluster and the relative arrival time of the first ray in every cluster are , by definition , zero . Therefore , the effective moment profile defined in take the following form : Fig . with dashed line the empirical of , of the channel model with four different of , which are in Table I . Each of these was after random of a channel impulse response . On the same plot , the theoretical of , by are solid , for each set of . It is shown that , in all , the data very tightly . The set A correspond to those in the . . a . Notice that , for the of this set , as O is , the spectral by approximately when O . rad , and then at about , which is precisely the behavior determined by provided K is much than K and . From , the next corner separation frequency , beyond which , almost to diminish , place when , which in this case to rad , in agreement with what is shown in Fig . . The from those of the previous one in that the arrival are halved , whereas the decay are doubled . This the same and and the same ratio as the set A . Thus , the , K , and are also the same as those by the set A . Accordingly , the only difference with respect with the set A is that the corner are reduced by a factor of Fig . . Spectral of as a function of the frequency rad for the model separation O around a central frequency with the four of shown in Table I . in dashed line are over channel . Each theoretical curve in solid line was . its value in set A the corner frequency associated with K by , which is sufficiently higher than to have a small but noticeable effect see the slight bump in the and rad . With the of set , these two corner are two away from one another , with their presence becoming clearly visible in the corresponding plot in Fig . . Intuitively , the existence of two corner separation beyond which the spectral or to decrease can be associated with the temporal resolution associated with O . More precisely , when O is too small , all in the impulse response are added with roughly the same phase in the sum for O and for O , yielding a high correlation . As O is , a point is at which some within the impulse response contribute with different random phases in , which to the channel power gains . This reduction when O is large enough so that all within the impulse response are added with different phases , only when O to make also the within each cluster add with different random phases . The variance of is directly by for an arbitrary frequency , which By substituting this and into , the correlation coefficient the form in , shown at the bottom of the page . By substituting the of , K , and K into this expression and after some algebra , one that the correlation coefficient Thus , extending what was found for the of in Section B , we see here that the lower asymptote of the spectral power correlation as O not only when but also when the product . Moreover , for any , we have that , O if and only if . When a sufficiently large number of of the impulse response of a wireless channel , the only model that can be directly are the ray arrival rate and the decay exponent . In contrast , the arrival rate and the decay exponent are not readily observable . Indeed , the very existence of is not unquestionably evident from the impulse response . Here , based upon the , we propose a quantitative method for and . By doing this , it is possible to assert the presence of if the value is comparable to or smaller than or the absence of them if As previously , the decay the arrival rate can be directly from as done in , e .., and . Additional for finding the two and can be by O , O at two or more different . For the channel model considered in this If there were no , the impulse response would be as if there were only a single cluster , beginning at , with decay exponent . In practice , it will be also necessary to identify the power scaling factor of the impulse response , namely , the value of b at . This can be easily done by taking the empirical mean of the squared magnitude of the first ray in the impulse response . The left hand sides of these L and L can be directly from the . Denote these as and , respectively . In principle , one could express and in closed form as of L and L , and then evaluate for L and L . However , is in this case the solution to the following quadratic equation : resulting from substituting into . Therefore , the approximate nature of and can turn a real positive root of into a complex valued or negative one . Moreover , even if one could measure L and L with infinite precision , there can be still two real valued of greater than . To overcome these , the following algorithm is . for L and L . Denote these as ,...,, respectively , where , . From these , calculate the , i , i ,...,. These will be the preliminary for . Let xi , i ,...,, be the corresponding preliminary for . Then , apply a least curve fitting optimization algorithm , with and as unknown , to match against the empirical of , at several . Use i and i as initial . Define the residual matching as i This technique for and was applied to impulse for the channel model , with Fig . . Left Typical impulse response for the channel model with the of top set E . , . , , and . and bottom set , . , . from the same cluster are shown with the same color . Top right Twelve of and , each from the of the impulse for each set of , which are by the method in Section . Bottom right of from and s range along them , the standard deviation of the empirical estimate of two of . For the first of these set E , . , . , , and . . Notice that this , i . e ., the arrive at the same rate as the within them , making it very difficult to distinguish one cluster from another in the time domain . It may be that the chosen and decay and are the same as those from the . . a used in Section . In turn , the product been chosen about ten times than that used in Section , so that the resulting dense train of it even harder to recognize the presence of . A typical channel impulse response for these is shown in Fig . top left . As , with the chosen , arrive so densely that it is virtually impossible to tell one from the other . After of independent of these impulse , of L and L were by . From the corresponding empirical of ,, which are for of evenly distributed from to rad , the and were the method , yielding the shown in the scatter plot of Fig . top right . The average error magnitude of these is less than of their true . More importantly , in all , the existence of is unambiguously revealed since all of are greater than . This more remarkable after that , in this case , the impulse are such that are almost totally , making it virtually impossible to distinguish one from the other . The for a scenario in which there are no is shown in Fig . bottom . In this case , the used for the model : , . , and . A typical channel impulse response from these , as the one shown on Fig . bottom left , the same overall decay exponent and a similar net density of as in the previous case . The corresponding of and , which are by the algorithm here , are shown in the scatter plot in Fig . top right . Here , for of of the channel impulse response , the corresponding empirical of , for of evenly distributed over , rad were . Notice how , in all , the of are well below , unambiguously revealing the absence of . The possibility of correctly the true of a channel , and in the case from the empirical estimate of ,, e ..,,, channel , will ultimately depend upon the accuracy of the latter estimate . To illustrate this dependence , the theoretical O , O is plotted in Fig . right bottom , for the parameter E and . The within five standard of the estimate above and below each of the O , O is shown as shaded . The standard deviation shown to what is when , is calculated from channel , which is the same number to obtain the shown in Fig . top right . Given the significant overlap of these and since the variance of , is proportional to , it is clear that , in this case , a reliable decision about which of the parameter better the data cannot be from much less than channel . We end by that the parameter estimation algorithm been for its simplicity and with the purpose of the potential applicability of the derived in and . Therefore , the search for better estimation , which must certainly exist , goes beyond the scope of this paper . The variance of the channel power over a band , rad is by substituting into , with the change of u and u as : these , the change of , and the identity , we obtain , after some manipulation , that The relative variability of with respect to the average total power better by the variance , i . e ., and reveal several interesting about the channel power variance , which are in the following . Except for the first term on the of , all the other grow above some frequency . It is a simple although long exercise of algebra to show that the frequency above which the growth rate all these is significantly than W is given by , . . If , then the variance of the total power be well as where we have used . Thus , in agreement with what was shown in B and , the variance of the power over an asymptotically infinite only when the number of significant to infinity . The narrow band channel power variance P E P is from by O grow proportional to W . It is straightforward but lengthy to show that the maximum value for Thus , unless comparable to or than , no reduction in channel power gain variance is to be . Notice also that , if there is a single cluster with deterministic amplitude and infinite duration i . e ., if we let and , the narrow band channel power variance should coincide with that of a channel in which case should distribute exponentially . Indeed , if we substitute the for K and K in , fix , and let , then it is easy to verify that E , which is precisely the variance to squared expectation ratio of an exponentially distributed random variable . The in the dashed line in Fig . display the value of E for a band of at rad from of the model for each set of given in Table I . The corresponding of E by are plotted in the same figure with solid . It is shown that , in all , the theoretical and simulation are almost indistinguishable , confirming the accuracy of our . It is also shown that , in all , as from , from zero , the channel power variance remains almost constant until a certain value , near the threshold defined previously . Beyond that threshold , all the decay a saturation point is , in a way that is consistent with what was found in . We have derived the general that characterize the second order statistics of the frequency response power gain in wireless indoor . Our are applicable to several well established channel in the literature , all based upon the model . In particular , the closed form formula here for the of the squared frequency response magnitude of the channel one to predict the variance of the aggregate channel power gain over any frequency band . This an approximation Fig . . variance of the channel power gain over a at rad , for the model with the four of A ,,, given in Table I . are over channel . The theoretical curve was and . to the diversity order of over narrow band in such . Our also allow one to obtain an upper bound for this measure of spectral diversity , and they show how and why this limit from a finite number of with a significant amplitude in the channel impulse response . In addition , the derived explicitly reveal how the statistical of the in the channel impulse response affect the spectral of the channel power gain . This one to use these spectral statistics to identify the presence or absence of . A simple procedure to accomplish this task been and its effectiveness been by it to of the channel model . Proof of Theorem : For notational simplicity , we will temporarily adopt a single indexing nomenclature for the path arrival times ti ,. More precisely and with a slight abuse of notation , we define the infinite random set . For our , it will not be necessary to define a between the i the index . Indeed , it will be sufficient to note that the double index matching condition i , , which i and is equivalent to the single index condition . the single index notation , the first term on the of is from , which where a from , and the last equality from In , a is a consequence of the independence the fact that all pi have zero mean see . Proceeding established in , whereas directly from Lemma . similarly , it is easy to show that each term in the summation Proceeding similarly with the frequency dependent function of in which one or more is not to any T , we obtain other index to zero . Thus , one must only consider the Substituting these for T and T into , by the result and into , th moment delay profile of , and the single and joint effective arrival and , are as in Proof of Lemma : Let E ,, with as in Definition . Recall the of i and from . If x , then where Proposition in the Appendix been used . The last term in the latter expression is the difference between the rightmost term in and the squared of . the effective moment delay profile defined in , the of can be written as Lemma : Let be an random process , with x possibly being equal to zero , and let be a random sequence i . i .. under . Then , for any a from and in the Appendix and from and . In turn , was the fact that and are bounded for . Finally , if x is random , it readily by Lemma in the Appendix that Lemma : Let the arrival times be an sequence with x randomly distributed . Define function as in . Then where the discrete random variable to the number of in , . Its expectation Substituting this result into , thus the proof . Lemma : Let the arrival times distribute as in Lemma , and define , as in . Assume that , is bounded for all . Then By dividing by and taking the limit as , and then substituting and Lemma , it that that , E and that the integrand in is symmetric , and proceeding with as in , we conclude that The proof is upon substituting this result into . Proposition : Let , be as in Definition , and let : be a bounded function . Then Proof : If x is random , then , is bounded , and the result trivially . Otherwise , x , in which case ﻿ We characterize the rate distortion function for zero mean stationary under the fidelity criterion and subject to the additional constraint that the distortion is uncorrelated to the input . The solution is given by two coupled through a single scalar parameter . This a structure similar to the well known water filling solution without the uncorrelated distortion restriction . Our fully characterize the unique statistics of the optimal distortion . We also show that , for all positive , the minimum achievable rate subject to the constraint is strictly than that given by the un constrained rate distortion function . This gap with the distortion and to infinity and zero , respectively , as the distortion to zero and infinity . Many source have the property that the end to end reconstruction error is uncorrelated with the source . We refer to such as uncorrelated distortion . As an example , consider a typical transform coder , as in Fig . . Here , a random vector is first by an analysis transform to yield U . Then U is , yielding the vector , U . The input signal is finally by , where is the synthesis transform , . If the quantization error is uncorrelated to U , and if I , then it is easy to show uncorrelated to , thus yielding a coder . More generally , any quantization scheme satisfying the following two a coder : a The error by the is uncorrelated to its input ; The linear if any before and after the perfect reconstruction in the absence of quantization . Property a is satisfied in many , e .. in high resolution or when a with dither either subtractive or non subtractive is employed . On the other hand , the condition Property is often sometimes implicitly in the design of filter , transform , , and feedback , . Thus , any source coder , for example , quantization , is a coder . The rate distortion performance of any coder can be to the underlying rate distortion function of the source , for a given distortion metric . One may question whether such a comparison is , in fact , fair . After all , the additional constraint that the end to end distortion is uncorrelated with the source is not upon . With this in mind , let denote the rate distortion function with the additional constraint that the end to end distortion is uncorrelated to the source . A formal definition of is given in Section . Clearly ,. However , to the best of the knowledge , the problem of not been formally before . Therefore , such as in which if any , and how can be , appear to be unanswered . In this paper , we not only give conclusive to the above , but more importantly , we completely characterize for the quadratic case as a lower bound for the rate achievable under the uncorrelated distortion constraint . We show , in Section , that can be through a single scalar variable a . This is a result which the conventional water filling that describe . We characterize the unique optimal statistics that the reconstruction to have in order to achieve , for a given source . In particular , we show be . In addition , we recast the in a transform sense . More precisely , we show that if the quantization are , independent both mutually and from the source , then the Transform is optimal among all perfect reconstruction , at all . A comparative analysis between and is then in Section . There we show that is convex and monotonically decreasing in , and that , , converging in the limit as . Furthermore , we show that , which is different from the well known result . It is worth that our are not tied to any particular source architecture , but are general in the sense that any scheme in which the end to end distortion is uncorrelated with the source can do no better than . Notation We use to represent random , a subscript when to one of its , i . e ., Xi is the i th element of the random vector . The expectation operator is by E . bold are used for matrices . The positive definite square root of a positive definite by . We write and for the determinant and the trace of a matrix , respectively . The probability density function and covariance matrix of a random column respectively by and , where is the transpose of . We write , for the cross covariance matrix between two . The spectrum of a ... random function is by , ,. The differential entropy and the differential entropy per dimension of an length random , respectively , by . a random process , the differential entropy rate of . We use to refer , respectively , to the mutual information and the mutual information per dimension between two . random , the mutual information rate . We write a . e . for almost everywhere . We begin by the definition of the quadratic rate distortion function under the constraint that the end to end distortion be uncorrelated with the source . Then , in Section . , we characterize this function for random , the case of stationary to Section . . Definition . The uncorrelated quadratic rate distortion function for a random vector source is defined as We now present one of the main of this paper , namely that , for vector , is given by two linked through a single scalar parameter . This the water filling that describe . The proof of this result , which is in Theorem , use of the following lemma . Lemma . Let Let and be two random with zero mean and the same covariance matrix , i . e ., , and the same matrix with respect to , that is If jointly , and distribution , then If furthermore , then equality is in , jointly . where is the relative entropy or distance between the two probability . The equality a from the fact that log is a quadratic form , and from the fact that , The inequality from the fact that , with equality . Thus , equality is y Remark . We note that the above Lemma Lemma . in , by the requirement that and , to the requirement , Theorem . Let the source be a zero mean random vector with positive definite covariance matrix Then Proof . Let U denote the set of all length random uncorrelated to , and define the With the above , can be written as where a directly from Lemma and where since the definition of see , that both and exist . We now prove , by contradiction , that the minimizer of log I in , namely , is such that . For this purpose , suppose that , and let be the of be a random vector with covariance matrix a strictly increasing function . Thus cannot be a minimizer of unless . The minimizer of log subject to can be found a variational approach . More precisely , the covariance matrix of the minimizer must necessarily be such that the derivative of the with respect to is zero at , for some , which is equivalent to the condition that the matrix differential , . the fact that log , for any positive definite matrix , the necessary condition be a minimizer the form The fact that needs to be positive definite that and that it is infeasible to have a negative sign before the square root in . This , together with the change of variable , directly to , with a . On the other hand , the value of a must be such that the equality constraint is satisfied . From , and Lemma see appendix , this requirement is equivalent to , which . Similarly , is by substituting into and then Lemma , which : The uniqueness of a is easily by that the right hand side of is monotonically increasing with a . Since a is unique , it from that the covariance matrix of I ; is unique , the proof . Transform Realization of : Closer examination of Lemma , when used in , that , for a source , can be by the transform architecture shown in Fig . . More precisely , an end to end distortion the optimal covariance matrix given by is by choosing the , where ,..., i . e ., the transform for , and by a random vector of quantization E with Interestingly , here E is not a scaled identity matrix , as is usually the case in transform . This discrepancy from the approximation E cE , commonly used to link the variance of to the bit rate at which each th transform coefficient is . In this expression , is a constant that on the of the source and on the type of . The well known optimal bit allocation , e .., in , is based upon this formula , and thus the total bit rate . On the other hand , the optimal quantization by Theorem need to be , their being such that the end to end mutual information is . Thus , the difference in the optimal for in each case is due to the fact that . The function defined in can be extended to random as : Definition . The uncorrelated quadratic rate distortion function for a random defined as The function for stationary random can be derived from the in Section . , by to random a covariance matrix , and then . More precisely , we have the following result : Theorem . Let the a stationary random process with spectrum such that , a . e . on ,. Then Y YN ,. It is known that ,, where and are the of and , respectively see e .. , Theorem . . . This result , together with Lemma , in the Appendix , and the fact that , a . e . on ,, that , for all . We can then apply Theorem to each , , and where the set of of . From , the optimal distortion covariance matrix for is Remark . It is interesting to note that the the optimal feedback derived in achieve an end to end distortion whose spectrum is given precisely by . Furthermore , it is easy to show that such would achieve the function if the noise due to the scalar quantization within the feedback loop were white noise uncorrelated with the input . The next theorem that strict and convexity with , but from in the asymptotic limit of large . Theorem . For any random vector stationary random process with positive definite covariance matrix monotonically decreasing and convex . In addition ,. Proof . We present here only the proof for the case of random . The proof for stationary proceeds in an analogous fashion . : We have that , provided that and exist and that the latter derivative is non zero . From , we obtain proving that is a strictly decreasing function since a . Convexity : The fact that a monotonically with increasing , together with , imply that D D , and thus is convex . : It is clear from that and . Since , as can be seen from , monotonically with increasing a , a , , it that a , and that a . Similarly , it from and the respect to a that , for fixed , a and a . We then have that and Theorem . For any random vector stationary random process with positive definite covariance matrix with , a . e . on ,, the following Proof . We present here only the proof for the case of random . The proof for stationary proceeds in an analogous fashion . Recall that for a random covariance matrix with one that , with equality . As a consequence , Equality a is by substituting and into the right hand side of . The validity of then directly by taking the limit of the right hand side of as a . In order to prove i , we will show that , where the function is the inverse of and is distortion rate function . For this purpose , consider the random vector Y , where is a symmetric , positive definite matrix , as in Theorem . Notice that are not uncorrelated unless I . The mutual information per dimension between and positive definite . We next show that for any and corresponding , choosing an optimal distortion is strictly smaller than , the distortion associated with , with the covariance matrix in when . Since , we obtain , from Lemma , and after some algebraic manipulation , that where the last inequality from the fact that . Finally , the fact that both and are monotonically decreasing , together with , i . This the proof . that a , which that monotonically with increasing . On the other hand , for all , the ratio can be lower bounded by . It can be shown that this bound with a and thus well , tending to as a , which is in agreement with Theorem . In this work we have completely , the quadratic rate distortion function subject to the constraint that the end to end distortion be uncorrelated with the source . We have further proved that this function convexity and with rate distortion function , but is positively bounded away from the latter , converging to only in the limit as the distortion to zero . We that the constraint the distortion to unboundedly grow as the rate to zero . We also the of for random and stationary random through transform and feedback quantization . with , and where :, and , denote the th column and the th row , respectively . If is analytic in a around each , for ,...,, then Lemma Theorem . . in . Let A be an infinite matrix with entry ak on the th diagonal . Then the of A are in the interval , the essential and , respectively , of the function . Moreover , if finite and is any continuous function of where the are the of the sub matrix A of A centered about the main diagonal of A . ﻿ The present an achievable rate region for two pair bidirectional relay based on successive compute and forward method . In these , one relay in the communication between two of . In their scheme , the use lattice for the at the , and random for the at the relay . They use the successive compute and forward strategy to decode two integer linear of the lattice in the , and successive interference cancellation for the in the . The channel can be considered as a broadcast channel with two receiver , but within each group , a pair of is considered as an additive white noise channel instead of a broadcast channel because each node its own message . It is shown that for all channel gains of and all channel gains of symmetric channel , the strategy to within constant of and bit per user of the cut set upper bound for restricted and non restricted , respectively . These are than those previously for this network , which have not the successive compute and forward method . Nowadays , the capacity of wireless is one of the main research in network information theory . As an interesting and important application , two way via have been , where the two way relay channel is used as a building block . Several were for the in , by extending and combining the basic for the relay channel , such as decode and forward , compress and forward and amplify and forward . When or , the effect of the noise remains on the signal by the relay . In contrast , by at the relay , the noise is completely removed from the signal . However , from loss . Compute and forward is another strategy for the which lattice . In this method , the receiver need not decode directly ; instead , it a linear equation of the based on the fact that integer of also belong to the . In , an achievable scheme was for the based on lattice , which was shown to achieve within bit from the cut set bound , for all channel . This strategy noise suppression without loss . In , the capacity of the with relay private been within constant of and bit per user from the single sided genie upper bound for restricted and non restricted channel , respectively . The extension of the to been done in , where more than two communicate via a relay in a directional manner . The way relay channel was studied in , where upper and lower for the capacity were given . In this setting , are divided into several , where each user in a cluster a single message intended to other in the same cluster . A similar symmetric setup with one cluster and equal channel gains , noise and power was considered in , where the sum capacity was . In , a type of three user was considered , where each user two independent , each of them intended to one of the other . In , a compute and forward approach was to exploit interference between the in an additive white noise network . In their approach , are free to select integer that match the channel as closely as possible , thus reducing the effective noise and increasing the achievable . In , the successive compute and forward approach was , where after a linear combination , the relay can combine it with its channel observation to obtain a new effective channel that can be better for the next targeted linear combination . In , the capacity of two pair two way relay for both linear shift deterministic and complex channel were . In these , a relay node the communication between two of . It was shown that the cut set upper bound is tight for the linear shift deterministic channel model . The strategy for the deterministic channel was to a specific superposition of lattice and random at the source and successive interference cancellation at the for the network . It was shown that for all channel gains , that strategy the cut set upper bound to within bit per user . In that approach , the lattice of were , so it was necessary for them to assume equal power for lattice of one pair , and to use for the excess part of the signal with extra power . However , the did not show that successive interference cancellation was actually feasible for lattice and together . In this paper , we study two pair two way bidirectional relay , the same model considered in , where one relay can help the communication between two of see Fig . . For brevity , here we name it . Here , we present a achievable rate region for a class of full duplex by successive compute and forward method , which the ability to efficiently decode multiple linear of the . In contrast to the method in , which is based on the superposition of random and lattice at the , and successive interference cancellation at the , in our method , it is enough to consider only lattice for at the , and successive compute and forward for at the relay in the . In the , random are used for at the relay , and successive interference are applied for at the . Moreover , in contrast to , we do not use and assume that all can transmit simultaneously . It is shown that for all channel gains and symmetric channel , the method within and bit per user of cut set upper bound for restricted and non restricted , respectively , which are than the and bit per user in . The remainder of this paper is as . In Section , the system model , the cut set upper bound and some about compute and forward are . The achievable rate region for is in Section . Capacity gap and some are in and , respectively . Some concluding are provided in Section . In this section , we review the system model for the asymmetric and its associated cut set upper bound . We also review some about lattice , and outline the successive strategy . The material of this section , for completeness , is a brief summary of the and from , in which the interested reader can find a detailed exposition . Consider an asymmetric as shown in Fig . , where and a pair of can communicate with each other via node a relay . There is no direct link between . The same situation for and . The relay is assumed to be able to listen and transmit at the same time . We use a real valued channel model for all in this network . Let log log , , log , U , , , , , , , , and for each i U , let denote the node on the other side of the relay which with i . The forward and backward of each pair are assumed to be different . Channel gains are written on each link in Fig . as , where i , and i . Node i U , .., to be to node , where . Each user is assumed to choose its transmit message independently of the other . The user at node i U its message into a xi , xi .., an function , , for , …,, the length in channel , and the of the relay into a , .., an function , for , …,, is a of a real random variable , satisfying the power constraint i , and , .. the previously received at transmit at the same time , . that transmission of each simultaneously . In this setup , non restricted , some dependency between the by different can be . In contrast , in restricted , apply the fi , thus yielding independent for all i . The rate is said to be achievable if , for any and for large , there an , code with such that the probability of error is less than . The received at node i U and at the relay given by the following , respectively where is a of independent and identically distributed real valued noise , i . e . with zero mean and unit variance . For each i U , and denote the and channel gains , respectively . Each node i U , a function to decode as where , .., yin . The cut set upper bound for the was in . We rewrite a reduced and equivalent version of it for both restricted and non restricted in the following theorem and corollary . For the proof and further , the reader can refer to . Theorem : The capacity region of the non restricted is upper bounded by Corollary : The capacity region of the restricted is upper bounded by min , , , i , U , i Remark : In , lemma , it is proved that and are within bit per user of each other . The latter was shown by the When the channel is complex valued , the capacity to C so the previous yield a gap of bit for two or , equivalently , bit per user . However , in our problem , we have assumed real valued , for which the capacity is simply . Thus , the gap between upper for restricted and non restricted would be bit for two or , equivalently , bit per user . Next , we review some on lattice and the compute and forward approach . For more see and the therein . A lattice code is defined in of two dimensional and , which form a lattice partition , that is , . and are usually fine and coarse , respectively . The lattice code is a lattice code which as and the region of as a shaping region which is by . For , the set of coset is defined as . is chosen so that its average power per dimension is , that is , the second moment per dimension of a random variable uniformly distributed over is . The coarse and fine should be good for and channel , respectively for definition of lattice goodness see . The rate of the lattice code is defined as In , Theorem , an achievable rate was for real valued based on the compute and forward strategy to decode one linear combination of . In , the successive compute and forward method was , where more than one linear combination of is desirable . We rephrase these in the following theorem for the case one receiver . Theorem : For real valued with , one receiver and channel coefficient h , h .., and equation coefficient vector a a , a .., aL , the following computation rate is achievable To successfully decode two linear , for example , a , , the following computation rate is achievable see In other , the relay can first aim to obtain a linear combination that is easy to decode and then use it to create a better effective channel for the second linear combination . In Theorem , a selected according to the design where different linear of are desirable . In the next section , we present an application for that approach . In this section , we present an achievable rate region for the . In our scheme , we consider restricted . The achievable rate region is also an achievable region for the non restricted . In the , based on the fact that the of two , we use the idea of successive interference cancellation for lattice in which was in the previous section . By considering appropriate for a and , the linear function of the of each pair is , respectively , at the relay . We would like to mention that in the superposition of and lattice from four is received at the relay in the . The relay then the successive interference cancellation method originally thought for for all , regardless of the fact that the are of different , that is , they have used the equation of for the lattice of each pair but they consider the other as in the rate equation . There is no proof for this performance and it does not seem to be a correct approach . In contrast , we use the interference cancellation method that been for lattice in . Moreover , in this method , lattice and have been used instead of lattice alone . The motivation for this is that the former method been shown in to yield the rate log for equal power which is higher than the one in which is log . In the , we extend the method for the in to the two of present in the . In this method , each pair of can be as an channel instead of a broadcast channel . This is due to the fact that each user of each pair its own signal , thus it can subtract this part from the received signal and can extract the message of the other user of that pair . This method higher than the method used in which as a broadcast channel with four . The full strategy is next . According to the strategy , the transmit signal at user i U is given by , which a lattice code ensemble of lattice with size , where , , , , . should be good for and its second moment per dimension is . i should be good for channel . We consider the following channel vector between and the relay The relay two linear of lattice code and , with the following The coefficient a by successive compute and forward individually with transmitter as shown by the following h By substituting the above in and , and are , respectively . The are shown below log b b a a aa r log a Pa a a h r ra h P Remark : As stated in , the closer a a a a a and are , the higher the rate by . However , in our problem , the two last of a are fixed to be zero , that is , a , a , , so as shown in the simulation section , not necessarily those of a , a which are closer to , result in higher . Remark : Consider the case where each pair of in the symmetric channel gains , that is , and . For this case , a and higher as shown by the following More generally , let us consider the channel gain vector as , where air for all i . It is possible to find , , and such that we have symmetric for each pair of , that is For this case , by assuming and , and are simplified as The relay two , from of sizes and , respectively . The signal by the relay is given by The two following of all different of channel gains are sufficient for the analysis to be carried out . The other can be and will lead to similar by the indices . . . Case : It is shown that , for any choice of channel gains , this can be done successfully as long as the following are satisfied . Proof : User first by treating as noise . This can be done with arbitrarily small probability of error as long as is satisfied . Then , the signal is from the received signal and is . This can be done with arbitrarily small probability of error as long as is satisfied , because by the same conclusion in for , in the , each pair of in the can be as an channel instead of a broadcast channel . As before , this is due to the fact that each user of each pair its own signal , thus it can subtract this part from the received signal and can extract the message of the other user of that pair . Hence , the can be as a broadcast channel with two receiver , and , instead of a broadcast channel with four , as was considered in . Clearly , and are redundant in view of and , respectively , because is an increasing function of . . . Case : It is shown that for any choice of channel gains , this can be done successfully as long as the following are satisfied . In this section , we compute the capacity between the achievable and the cut set upper bound by the strategy . For the , we obtain the capacity by considering symmetric channel gains for each pair of . For the , we consider the general case . Lemma : : For the with symmetric channel gains for each pair of , for any rate , satisfying with error probability for all channel gains . i U , can be done with arbitrary small Table for a , a , b , b , for each channel coefficient error probability for all channel gains . i U , can be done with arbitrary small Fig . Non restricted and restricted cut set upper and achievable for , , , and different for a : Note that if I , I : unit vector , and , then the rate I the of and . Thus , the capacity of the restricted with symmetric channel can be within bit per user of the cut set upper bound . By against , we see that the gap is bit with respect to the cut set upper bound for non restricted . In this section , we illustrate the performance of the method for the via and discuss the . All the rate shown in the and the table are in bit . Fig . Cut set upper and achievable for . , Assuming , we consider several shown in . , . , . and a , a , and b , b , Table , and for each case , we compute the of the a , a and b , b which yield the highest and . As it is from the , not necessarily and substituting into , in those of a , a and b , b which are closer to , and , result in higher . The first row of the table r the of which are , and , , respectively . a , a and b , b the the for and . As it is seen , not necessarily with a , a , and b , b , Other can be proved similarly . in higher . of the table the for Fig . Non restricted and restricted cut set upper and achievable for , , , by our method and the method of for the communication . It can be seen that , for most , a , a , in higher . of the table show the for and , in this case , with a , a , and b , b , in higher . Fig . the cut set upper bound and the achievable for an channel gain vector equal to , , , and different for a and . It is seen that the choice a , a , and b , b , in higher . This result is also shown at row of the table . Fig . the cut set upper bound and the achievable for a symmetric channel gain vector equal to . , . , . , . , and for a , a , and b , b , , which yield the rate region . As it is seen from the figure , the distance between the achievable rate , . , . the last row of Table and the cut set bound is bit , which is than the found in Lemma . Assume the channel gain vector to be , , , , and . Fig . the cut set bound , the achievable by the method and the of for the communication . As it is seen from the figure , for most , the method that are within those by Lemma . In this paper , we studied the capacity region of an asymmetric full duplex with no direct link between . We established an achievable rate for this network by lattice for at the and random for at the relay . For , we successive compute and forward and successive interference cancellation at the relay and at the , respectively . It was shown that , for the with symmetric channel , the achievable rate is within constant of and bit per user of the cut set upper bound for restricted and non restricted , respectively . In this paper , we have used real valued . For complex valued , we have C instead of in the capacity expression , so the would be twice the for real valued , that is , and . bit per user of the cut set upper bound for restricted and non restricted , respectively . These are one half of those in , that is , and bit per user for restricted and non restricted , respectively . ﻿ Fundamental in control have been for the last with many stability , from channel transmission minimal rate based on information theory , to minimal signal to noise . For the latter , it been confirmed early on that the usual increase the minimal for stability , such as unstable plant , non minimum phase , time delay , together with new such as communication channel and colored transmission noise . In this work we specifically propose two to completely avoid the effect of on the minimal for time . The first approach from the observation that the controller that the minimal for a minimum phase plant in , all its outside the unit circle . Such observation allow then to characterize this set of as candidate of alternative plant with the same unstable , which in turn will not increase the minimal for stability above the expression only by the plant unstable . Our second approach the set of possible that do not increase the limitation to any location , by the synthesis of a two degree of freedom linear time invariant controller solution that the minimal for stability only by the plant unstable . Index Control over , Linear , control , Optimal control . control have been a subject of research for at least the last two , with review available in , . on fundamental on stability in this framework were for example in , . performance have also been extended information theory to include disturbance rejection , reference and , as in , . A different approach for is , on the other hand , in where an framework for stability of feedback , both in continuous time and discrete time , is based on the channel model signal to noise ratio . The fundamental limitation in is as an lower bound on the channel . is with the de ´ ´ ,´ Mar ´ , Chile . A .. is with the de ´ El ´ , de ´, Chile . : The thankfully acknowledge the support from , through Basal Project . for the stabilization of an unstable plant model by of output feedback over a memoryless additive white noise communication channel , such as the case in Figure . More so , in recent it been shown that for second order statistics , control over a power constrained erasure channel are equivalent to control subject to an constraint , . Furthermore , the equivalence , in a second order sense , been extended to include fading in . As a result , the approach been able to capture the most important communication and characterize their impact on fundamental , as well as performance , see also for example , . More so , the approach also a reinterpretation of the classic control feedback loop by of the reference to disturbance ratio , , , which performance as the trade off between reference and closed loop input disturbance rejection . A common observation , in particular in , is that the limitation for output feedback stabilization of an unstable plant model with , is strictly greater than the one for state feedback emphasis added by the present . As an alternative the of propose a linear time alternative control scheme to eliminate the effect of the on the for . Our first contribution in this work is to explicitly characterize the one degree of freedom , see Figure , optimal controller that the minimal in . Furthermore we will characterize the of such controller and prove that these are all outside the unit circle . To the best of our knowledge such a characterization is novel . The controller outside the unit circle are then by definition . As a result , if the of an alternative plant model with the same unstable belong to this specific set of , then both , output feedback and state feedback , will coincide thus the effect of over the limitation . Our second contribution the set of potential to an arbitrary set , by and a specific two degree of freedom controller solution . The use of a two degree of freedom controller been before in order to eliminate the effect of in different the approach , see for example , . The contribution here instead is the explicit definition of a two degree of freedom controller to avoid the deleterious effect of arbitrary many , the minimal for stability only by the plant unstable . A preliminary result for first order plant was in . As a result of our we update the common observation about minimal and as : the for stabilization of an unstable plant model with , via output feedback , is greater or equal than the for state feedback , in an setting . This paper is organized as : Section the behind the minimal in . Section characterize the structure for the optimal controller that the minimal for an unstable plant model and the zero for this optimal controller . Section the synthesis of the two controller that the effect of any arbitrary plant zero . We conclude the exposition in final and possible future research . In this section we present the general plant model , and summarize the discrete time for solution . where i , i are and distinct plant model . The term is the stable , minimum phase , part of . The relative degree the choice of is to avoid a plant time delay that would further increase the later minimal for stability . Channel model : we consider here the memoryless channel model , see for example Figure . This type of channel is by the channel input power and its channel additive noise process . Channel additive noise process : The channel additive noise a zero mean i . i .. white noise process with variance s . : The assumed to be zero , that is we consider here only a regulation problem , not a problem . Consider the feedback loop in Figure where the problem is to stabilize an unstable plant subject to a channel power constraint . From Figure we observe that the closed loop between the channel input u and the exogenous given by u , with the closed loop complementary sensitivity function . The channel input is to satisfy the power , for some input power level . We assume that the closed loop feedback system is stable , in the sense that for any distribution of initial , the distribution of all closed loop in Figure to a stationary distribution . Without loss of generality , we therefore consider the of the stationary distribution of the relevant . The power of the channel input signal then . The channel input power constraint can be from this , as a constraint on the channel We thus observe that for the setting in Figure , the limitation is uniquely defined by the H norm of . We now present a novel lemma which a lower bound to the channel in discrete time that when the closed loop system is stable . This lemma also sufficient and necessary , stated in of the transfer function so that the channel is equal to this lower bound . The latter is given only by the unstable is universal in the sense that it for any choice of Figure . Before proceeding , it is convenient to note that , i . i .., it that , for every , u , and s . This that the channel is given by is an all pass transfer function . and are equivalent to Proof . Since the are independent of the channel noise , we have that with equality in a zero mean , and equality in is the only exogenous signal in the system in which mean . The external disturbance case is for example in , for performance , however here we are interested in , thus the no external disturbance stated in condition i . The channel output power is thus , condition i . If the closed loop system is stable , then the sensitivity function is stable and there can be no unstable . Thus where is due to inequality and the fact that log is a concave function , with equality if and only if does not depend on . On the other hand , is due to Bode integral theorem and the fact that the unstable of , which cannot be , appear as of , with equality if and only if the of are exactly the unstable of , Theorem . . . Combining this with and , it that i , and in the statement are necessary and sufficient for equality in , and that the latter two are equivalent to , the proof . It is worth that Lemma is valid regardless of whether there are in the plant model or its relative degree . It is well known , see , that the minimal for a state feedback strategy and an output feedback strategy , as in Figure , if the plant unstable , minimum phase with no time delay . As stated in the presence of the to a value o such that o . We will show in the next section that , for a one degree of freedom controller solution , this is not always true , and on we can still have o , even if the plant model . We next present a theorem which characterize the unique controller which the lower bound . Theorem . For the system shown in Figure , unstable , minimum phase with relative degree , it that . Furthermore , the is by a unique controller the set of , given by Proof . We will show that , in this case , there a and of Lemma and that such controller is unique . For this purpose , let us define the and , respectively , as the numerator and denominator of Notice that is a stable all pass transfer function if and only if all the of are outside the unit circle . On the other hand , from , the controller can be expressed as phase leaves no unstable cancel . In order to ensure not cancel the unstable that those become the only of , one must choose i . Since must have an all pass frequency response , the denominator of must be , automatically yielding a stable . In summary , we have found that there a which and of Lemma , and that it is unique . This and that the corresponding minimal controller is the one defined in . Theorem how the unstable of the plant a fundamental role in the minimum of the communication channel . It is also easy to see that , for a stable plant , the minimal is zero . Remark Without , is a minimum .. Theorem that , in this case one degree of freedom , minimum phase , and without , one can reach an equal to and obtain a stable closed loop system . Thus , the for stability is actually a minimum . However , it shall be noted that the sensitivity function , and thus it is all pass . This that the channel noise the only exogenous signal in the system is not being at any particular frequency . Notice also that the stability of the minimum system that if one the controller and then are added , closed loop stability is not . However , any additional external disturbance will increase the variance of u as well as that of the other in the system , increasing the above . After the in the previous it is natural to ask ourselves the following question : Can the lower bound given by be if the plant We next show that if , the answer is yes , for very special . In doing so , we will also provide some insight into the why in general the answer is no . the reasoning in the proof of Theorem , let and be as in , so that . In order to reach the lower bound in , condition must hold , which that for some complex such that , and a set of complex , with a correspondence between each root outside the unit circle and one of the unstable of from condition in Lemma . The stability of that can only have stable and thus , in view of , only i . e ., and ai i , ,...,. and , from , do not cancel the unstable of a requirement for . We now lift the assumption and propose an unstable plant model that also , and to stress the difference with , such an unstable plant model is . The term is the stable , minimum phase , part of . As relative degree of is also one . From , the only way in not cancel these is that the latter are also of . Clearly , this is not possible in general , since , as we have seen , satisfying and in Lemma that the specific form given by . This that , in general , if the closed loop system is stable and if indeed , then the cannot reach the lower bound in . At the same time , the above analysis the following question : Are there special in which the plant model and yet the lower bound is compatible with closed loop stability The following theorem an answer to this question . In the shown in Figure , an equal to the lower bound in is reachable , while yielding a stable closed loop system , if and only if and the i of constitute a subset of . If the in i are met , then the unique controller , which when in Figure an equal to , is given by Proof . i As above , the lower bound in to take the form given in , which if and only if given by as . A construction of the optimal controller is also for example in , Theorem . the approach , but such approach the characterization of the zero obscure . Since that relative degree equal to , it that when relative degree , which is not realizable causally . If , this controller is , the stable given by thus satisfying and in Lemma and does not cancel the unstable of . The only condition be a controller is that it does not cancel the unstable of either , which is equivalent to being a subset of the of . This claim i . When , the set the of . These can be studied standard root locus analysis , which the of the expression , as the varied , for any given rational transfer function . , we will show that when , all the of lie outside the unit circle . Since is as in , it its outside the unit circle and all its inside the unit circle . Recall that the of continuously migrate from the of at to the of toward . Hence , close to zero , lie outside the unit circle . Suppose that for some when , for some and some ,. Then is real and positive . that see , we conclude that . Thus , from , all the which start outside and end inside the unit circle lie exactly on the unit circle only when , which is strictly less than . Therefore , all the of are non minimum phase , proving claim . The fact that it feasible not cancel the of , which if and only if these are a subset of . In the latter case , the be given by , thus taking the form , which the given by . Therefore , this is the only controller which the closed loop system while satisfying the for equality in . This the proof . Example . Consider an unstable plant with relative degree given by , with then the channel can be set to . For and real , then further into More so , the optimal controller that is then defined as Thus , we have a controller without unstable zero pole which a stable such that i i , ,, and thus with s , and thus the lower bound in . Remark . Claim in Theorem a perhaps surprising fact : in the setup corresponding to Figure , or its are a subset of , then the controller at least non minimum phase . This may seem since , in general , in the loop transfer function the closed loop system harder to control it the of the complementary sensitivity function and it minimum phase . Remark . Despite the fact that specific satisfying the of claim of Theorem do exist , the latter theorem that for almost all with , and for all with , the minimum for stability in the scheme of Figure is in general strictly greater than the lower bound . Therefore the result is theoretical in nature , since the plant model and should not be assumed as design . This the explicit definition of a controller , as in the following section , for dealing with the practical aspect of plant model not necessarily at the i , whilst the minimal for stability only by the plant unstable . When the channel output is directly fed back , then an alternative two controller solution that is possible , see Figure . Theorem . The two controller that when the unstable plant model arbitrary with is given by , where for C the are the solution of the following set and for C the are the solution to the next set . Since we want to achieve we therefore impose the need for C CoG , with as in in . We then further assume that C Since we require for stability that C the space of all proper and real rational stable transfer , , the numerator of C must contain all of , thus , for all . The structure for that the one by . The are easily by imposing the set of algebraic in , from which we then obtain C as in . To obtain C we follow a similar approach . From C CoG , at each zero of we have that C , for . To satisfy we propose C as in . Finally , to obtain the that achieve the given we then impose the algebraic in and obtain C as in , which this proof . The remarkable implication of Theorem is that we can effectively reduce the requirement , the increasing effect due to the presence of the , whilst in an setting . This is by the plant model as seen by the channel input , through the second path that the channel output through C , see Figure . Remark . The result from Theorem also when the communication channel is over the feedback path between the plant and controller and . Fig . . Two solution for Example , equivalent plant model configuration . Example . Consider . We recognize then z , and . For one unstable pole we also have that and . We then have from Theorem that , and . we have that . Therefore the two controller that for the plant model studied in this example is given by As a note , observe that if , then the C path up , and the plant model . We then recover the standard controller solution for of an unstable plant without . In this work we have studied how to avoid the effect of on the minimal for output feedback stability . The first observation is that the optimal controller that the minimal for a minimum phase plant with no time delay , all its outside the unit circle . This observation allow us then to characterize a set of specific that can be now at the plant model , and would not increase the minimal for stability above the expression by only the plant unstable . We then used a two controller structure to propose , for output feedback , the synthesis of such that can retrieve the minimal , even when the unstable plant model . Future research should consider extending the for more complex communication channel and replicate this study for the continuous time setting . ﻿ This paper novel on the joint problem of sampling , reconstruction and quantization of . literature on this topic exclusively with band limited in form . Our key departure from is that we deal with continuous time reconstruction of not necessarily band limited . Our approach and from optimal data and horizon control theory . The key conclusion from the work here is that , in the case under study , the optimal design problem can be partitioned into two sub , namely i the design of an optimal filter by sampling and an optimal , which works directly on the . Simulation are which illustrate the performance of the optimal A converter designed via these . Key : Sampling , quantization signal , data control . In many , one needs to convert , continuous time into discrete time . This to an important set of regarding the best way to represent a signal by a sequence of and , such that the information loss inherent in the sampling and quantization process is in some sense . In the present work , we are interested in how to quantize a possible non band limited signal to obtain the possible reconstruction distortion . We will show that , for a given sampling rate and reconstruction , minimization of reconstruction error , in an L sense , can be converted into a discrete time problem . It turns out that if an appropriate filter is used , then all the information to find the optimal sequence can always be extracted from discrete time of its output , even if the continuous time input signal is not band limited . the optimal quantization problem to finding the solution of a combinatorial optimization , which is in general intractable . Our proposal is to convert the optimal quantization problem into a data moving horizon optimization problem with decision . The method excellent and only limited computational effort . It our previous work in by on data rather than merely on discrete time . Background to the work here from distinct . The first of these is associated with the problem of sampling in the absence of quantization . The second related field of research is concerned with quantization of where the sampling strategy been . The third stream of prior work in the area of data control theory . Here , the emphasis typically been on regulation zero reference with unconstrained decision . In the present work we extend these to account for non zero reference and decision . Our approach from the work above by virtue of the fact that we design the joint optimal sampler and data moving horizon optimization . This to significant performance gains , with alternative which do not take account of the interaction between sampling and quantization . The remainder of this work is organized as : In Section we present the continuous time AD conversion problem and how it can be into discrete time . Section the continuous time horizon . Simulation are included in Section . Section . The sampling interval is constant and equal to . Thus , are at a rate of per second . In Fig , the reconstruction discrete time sequence u into a continuous time signal . For example , in case of zero order hold reconstruction , the impulse response be . In the classical framework of perfectly band limited reconstruction , would be an ideal low pass filter with cutoff frequency t . On the other hand , in most practical , zero order hold or some other form of short impulse response filter sometimes non causal is generally used for reconstruction . The the error frequency weighting filter see , e .., . It one to represent the different impact of the error at different for a particular application . For example , if the system is employed for audio , be designed to model the response of human hearing . We are interested in designing a which the L norm of the frequency weighed error see Fig . , i . e ., the cost function For the analysis below , it is more convenient to rearrange the system of Fig . to the equivalent form shown in Fig . . In this figure , the continuous time filter is by the transfer function In order to represent the continuous time filtering by , we define the continuous time version of u as If we denote the impulse response of the frequency weighting L , then its output Thus , the quest for optimal sampling and quantization can be stated as the optimization problem of finding the sequence u as in that the L norm of the reconstruction error , i . e .: It will now be shown that the L continuous time optimization problem in is equivalent to an discrete time optimization problem , where the weighting depend on the signal inter sample behaviour . This is established in the following lemma , originally without a formal proof in . Lemma frame a frame forLet the sequence of span , i . e . , with for all . Let L be defined as in for the sequence of . Let the signal a L , and define , and ,, via We note that the first term in the last line of is well defined since a L as by the Lemma . The second term is finite by virtue of the inequality and the fact that L , which in turn the third integral is also bounded . Since inner are by definition linear and a real , one by substituting into that where u is an un sequence that the global minimum , namely , then Remark From lemma and remark , it is clear that to minimize the only information is an optimal un sequence u or , alternatively , the sequence and the ,. The latter to of the function of , which can be determined off line after choosing reconstruction and error weighting and then incorporated to the quantization algorithm . On the other hand , can be from u by with respect to u and to zero , which to In practice , any quantization algorithm to work with discrete time . and arise the need to determine whether a quantization algorithm can elaborate or obtain from of the input . Consider , first , the determination of the series of . From definition , we have There might exist more than one optimal sequence if the reconstruction stage is redundant . From the last line of , it is clear that the series of through a filter with frequency response can be by passing the input sig given and then taking the every . i . e ., if we denote the impulse response of by , then a , , Let us next consider the determination of u , the sequence of which reconstruction error in the absence of quantization . It is known from sampling theory that , for any input signal , u can be by sampling the output of a filter to the reconstruction filter . From these , for the system in Fig . , the ideal filter for a given reconstruction filter is given by The above suggest that all the necessary information about the input signal for optimal quantization to be feasible can be from of the input signal , and that the filter is not unique . We will provide next necessary and sufficient for a filter to yield that allow for optimal quantization . Consider the discrete transform of u , and let and denote the discrete and continuous of any , respectively . by another filter . The discrete transform of such sequence of would be Recovery of can be in the discrete time domain by a discrete time filter to the sequence , such that From and it can be seen that a sufficient and necessary condition is the existence of a periodic transfer function , such that for the stage to be able to determine u from the and allow for optimal quantization . As a particular case , if A , then , from and , The latter equality can also be from by that A if and only if , ,,,. Of course the stage would need to implement the correction filter based upon knowledge of and , according to . Two important special are to be : If a no frequency beyond rad , then any filter satisfying for some C C would make optimal quantization possible from the . This result is not surprising , since by sampling theorem , the of a band limited signal contain all the information about the complete signal . If is band limited to a frequency a but a energy at greater than a , then any prefilter band limited exactly to a satisfying for some K K would have a feasible correction filter that optimal quantization possible from the . The conclusion from the above is that quantization for optimal reconstruction of an input signal not possible , but either the use of an appropriate filter satisfying to get the from , or , alternatively , the needs to know the signal between sampling . For the general case , minimization of would require the evaluation of for every possible sequence the optimization becomes in u , u U . For sufficiently long , tractable . To overcome this problem , we propose to use from the horizon control framework and optimize over a short horizon of . A based on this idea been recently by the current in for an all discrete time system , near optimal performance with rather short horizon . In what we will extend this idea to the data case , and show , via , that significant distortion reduction is when converting non band limited . Consider the system at . Instead of to optimize the cost over , we will aim to minimize the cost within a finite time interval , where , are design . We will only concentrate on the optimal sequence of to be for the interval , For the purpose of in the horizon the effect of past , it is convenient to describe the continuous time filter by its state space representation where A , , R and is as defined in . In , for a possible non causal . If is causal , then . Notice that the first term on the right hand side of the effect of the choice of u within the horizon . This term to the forced response of to the input u , which can be conveniently as On the other hand , the second term on the right hand side of the natural response of when the initial state is . We define the difference between this initial state response and the input signal a within the horizon as the target function , for the horizon at : By and , the cost can be expressed as the L norm of the difference between the zero initial state response and the target function : Since L , one can exchange the order of sum and integration in and rewrite it in matrix form as where the vector and the symmetric , positive definite matrix are defined element wise as The derived above for the cost function over a finite horizon allow us to introduce the data horizon . The algorithm , at a given instant , the vector of u that the total reconstruction error from to defined in . Then , the first element of u is sent to the output of the . The horizon is then forward by , and iteration . The algorithm , beginning at instant , can be as : The sequence of step the output of the data horizon sampler . If the input signal is not band limited to , the algorithm and frequency weighted quantization noise . For that purpose , it does simultaneous adaptive filtering on the input signal and adaptive noise shaping of the quantization noise , thus respecting the interaction between both phenomena . It is interesting to note that , as the horizon is made , the output of the sampler defined above the optimal feasible output sequence possible defined in . We will first show an example the performance of the data horizon against the so all discrete time horizon in in the following situation : The input signal , a , is an audio signal that frequency up to . Its frequency energy content is shown in Fig . . Figure : Spectral composition of the input signal a . • The sampling frequency is half the to avoid i . e ., . i . e ., it impulse response . • The frequency error weighting filter to the third order model for the acoustical response of the human ear . Its frequency response is shown in Fig . In the simulation , the full knowledge of , and the matrix defined in . However , it based on direct of the input signal . Thus , since the implicit filter is a unity gain , that the all discrete time will be unable to determine the target function to be by the reconstruction stage . On the other hand , the the same matrix but access to the behaviour of the input signal . Fig . the reconstruction error from the of both , for several horizon . It Figure : Reconstruction error to distortion for from the of all and data , for to , for a non band limited input . can clearly be how , in this case , the converter in the present work the all discrete time converter of . It can also be seen that the distortion a small decrease with the increase of the horizon length . This that , in this example , the main contributor to the distortion is noise , for both . Notice that the without an anti filter . This , together with its much lower distortion in comparison with that of the , that the data horizon optimization algorithm a form of filtering of the input signal that effectively . This paper shown how horizon data control can be to design optimal AD . A key departure from in this area is that we optimize a version of the continuous time reconstruction error for not necessarily band limited input . Inter , we show that the optimal design problem can be decomposed into two , namely the design of an optimal analogue filter together with an optimal . We that the latter is feasible if only of the are available . The efficacy of the method been by an example an audio signal below its rate . ﻿ The main purpose of this note is to show that in a realization of the causal information rate distortion function for a th order source , under a single letter sum distortion derived under the assumption that the have a joint probability density function . Consider the causal information rate distortion function for a random source , where the minimization is over all conditional satisfying the distortion constraint If the is by some conditional distribution , the associated pair a realization of . Here we assume that such distribution and that the corresponding realization a joint . This assumption is satisfied if , for example , is and , . The first purpose of this note is to show that in a realization of the causal for a th order source , under the average distortion constraint , and supposing that in such realization the have a joint , it that The given in are a special case of the given by , , , for abstract , where their derivation is not included . The value of our first result in that In this proof , we pose the causal optimization problem with as the decision variable instead of the collection as would be the case in for probability an associated . Accordingly , we impose an explicit causality constraint on , instead of causality structurally by to be the product of , as done The second and main goal of this document is to note that from a it is clear that does not hold , except for . Crucially , does not become true by supposing that the joint stationary , thus , Remark . and what is stated in the discussion paragraph at the end of , Section . The causal under the above is by the solution to the following optimization problem : where the minimization is over the conditional . Notice that d is an explicit causality constraint equivalent to . Before writing the and taking its differential , let us obtain the differential On the other hand , for each i ,...,, the causality constraint d in the as It will be convenient to manipulate this expression so as to give it a structure similar to the other in the . For this purpose , notice that From the theory of optimization on vector is a solution to Optimization Problem only if for every function gyn as defined in , i . e ., for every conditional . This if and only , e , , e , , b In order attain causality in , the must depend only on and . Since for each , the function does not depend on with i , the causality constraint see a . Suppose now that i . e ., causality is satisfied for , for . In such case , which case becomes b . Substituting the latter into and then in a . Finally , from a , it that in a realization of the causal it must hold that ﻿ This paper closed form for the space frequency second order statistics for the power gain of indoor . These hold for channel in which path are clustered , both in their arrival and their arrival times . Assuming that the arrival times are independent of the of arrival , we derive a closed form expression for the covariance between the channel power gains at two , at any pair of and . This expression that same covariance asymptotic reduction attainable by increasing , only if , and that the covariance is symmetric in its dependence with and with . Thus , the channel power gain at higher frequency less variation than at lower . Finally , we show that the variable part of the covariance approximately as . The propagation of radio within indoor is a complex phenomenon , depending on the operating frequency , the type and location of the and the presence of a usually large number of . Assuming linearity and that the channel vary slowly , the channel behaviour is fully by its frequency response ,, corresponding to the transform of its time invariant channel impulse response . Due to multiple in the surrounding , is typically composed of a sequence of short with random arrival times and , which tend to decrease with arrival time . It been that , in indoor , both the arrival times and arrival of these path distribute in see and , respectively . As a result , given any two known to belong to the same cluster , one cannot assume their times to be independent . The same is true for their of arrival and for their corresponding . The analysis of the space frequency statistics of the indoor wireless channel commonly been by the second order statistics of the complex frequency response or of its magnitude . The former case the complex correlation This work was by the Research Council under , and Basal project , and by the Research Direction of Mar ´ ´ . where H and H are at receiver or transmitter antenna x and x , respectively , and where complex conjugation . This complex correlation , with , been studied in , and in , analytically . In both , it is found that with the x and x more rapidly when the operating frequency is . The analysis in closed form for c , , for non isotropic three and two dimensional diffuse assuming independent , i . e ., that the complex channel gain associated with from one direction are independent of those from another direction . Under this assumption , it was shown in that for the dimensional case , the speed of light , is the complex series coefficient of the distribution function of scattered power , is the th order function of the first kind , and f is the angle of the vector x x with respect to a reference azimuth direction . The second case envelope correlation is concerned with E H H and the corresponding envelope correlation e , , . The dependence of the latter expectation on the studied in , , from measured data and for . These reveal that , as , e , , as the , although it to approach a minimum , asymptotic value in the range . . , which is significantly than the lower asymptote of c , , . Our focus in this paper is on the channel power gain and its second order statistics , associated with E H H . Considering the latter expectation instead of that of the complex gains or their is relevant for two main . First , the instantaneous channel power gain at a given frequency the associated capacity . Hence , in the second order statistics of would allow for a better estimation of the performance of spatial diversity based upon , for example , maximum ratio combining with associated to different antenna and or carrier . Second , in based upon selection combining , as well as in multiple access subject to the power capture effect , the performance on the joint statistics of two or more power , from different and carrier . In this paper , we find closed form for the second order statistics of the channel power gain , associated with the These depend explicitly upon the , not necessarily equal and the separation distance . Our analysis is valid for an extended model , with with clustered arrival times and , as in the considered in , . The reveal how c , , are , but predict a strictly positive lower asymptote , which is by go to infinity , for any , and by , but only if . In other , there a dependent additive term in c , , and , in the limit , increasing frequency or spatial separation asymptotically this term to zero , yielding the same asymptotic reduction . A second finding is that c , , in exactly the same way with respect to as it does with . The latter , by considering the case , that the power gain of with higher central frequency have smaller variability . On the other hand , the show that , beyond of a few central frequency , the dependent component in c , , as . In the next section , we present the channel model and . The main are derived in Section , by . All are in the Appendix . As in , , the wireless indoor considered here are by their impulse . Each impulse response of a sequence of path with random , at random times and , and where arrival times and are clustered . At a given reference location x in space , such random impulse response h can be written as where ti , is the random arrival time of the th in the i th cluster and ai , is the corresponding real valued amplitude . Our associated with the arrival times , and of are next . where Ti is the random arrival time of the i th cluster , and ti , is the random delay of the th in the i th cluster relative to Ti , where T T and ti , ti , , for all i . By definition , the cluster with its first ray , and thus In the forthcoming analysis , it will be useful to describe the overall distribution of arrival times by their corresponding arrival density . This one to introduce the following preliminary and notation . For an infinite sequence of random arrival times , with x possibly In this expression , is a random variable the amplitude of the i th cluster . The real valued random variable ai , is the amplitude of the th within the i th cluster relative to that cluster amplitude . The polarity pi , take from , with equal probability . The cluster are independent given their arrival times . As in , the dependency of the cluster upon their arrival times can be by the cluster order moment delay profile if T is random . Likewise , the relative are independent given , and we define where , , for every i . As we shall see , here we will only need to consider the ,,..., . Let i , be the angle of arrival , measured with respect to a reference the horizontal plane , of the with arrival time ti ,, As in , , the of arrival of the within the th cluster can be decomposed as In this expression , is the angle of arrival of the th cluster , while , for each are the of arrival of the If the transmitter and receiver and the scattering environment are chosen at random , then the cluster will be uniformly distributed , as in , . Likewise , the absolute will also be uniformly distributed . Moreover , the in , reveal that , in indoor , the distribution of the difference between cluster and the angle of the first cluster in each location is also uniform . This that , conditioned to a given location room and building , cluster arrival can be assumed independent . In contrast , we shall not assume that the are independent , since the within each cluster have been found to arrive from a relatively small range of . Instead , we will assume that , for all , the relative are independent and identically distributed . More precisely , we will work based upon the following assumption : The cluster arrival are independent and uniformly distributed over , p . The relative arrival i , are independent , identically distributed with probability density function : , p , . Cluster arrival and relative arrival are independent , i . e ., , . In any given indoor scenario , the impulse response from transmitter to receiver will depend on their corresponding antenna . Suppose the impulse response is when the antenna is at a given point x on the horizontal plane . If we consider two additional receiver , x x , x x , then their arrival times will increase or decrease , depending on their arrival . More specifically , if the separation is small relative to the distance from the , then the arrival can be considered to be the same at x and x . In such case , an arrival time at position x becomes and , at x and x , is the random delay increment , in , for the th produced by moving from x to x or from x to x and is the speed of light . Thus , the channel frequency for receiver x and x are For the above model and with only the given within it , we will next derive closed form for the second order statistics of , over both space separation and frequency . In this section we will derive a closed form general expression for the space frequency covariance c , , defined in . This result is formally stated as : Theorem : Under the in Section , be two random distributed as , g g , , , b b and where denote , respectively , the transform and the L norm of the function . where a from the fact that ak and that the are zero mean , i . i ., and independent of all the other . On the other hand , Since each amplitude ak and the are i . i .. with zero mean , it that all of in which a given index is different from all the will be zero . This leaves only the following index : Notice that and and to the double index notation for and within , the function can be written as , From Assumption we have that the random variable is identically distributed for for every The corresponding to T , T and the T and T have been in , proof of Theorem . Proceeding as in the latter proof , it is easy to show that these are as in please see for . Substituting , and and into , we obtain , the proof . Theorem some interesting of the space frequency covariance c , , : The difference T T is the variance of , i . e ., the variance of the impulse response energy . This is the only term which does not depend upon , . As already in , Remark , under mild on the impulse response statistics , the T , T on the right hand side of vanish as . The latter that , in our case , the space frequency covariance does not go to zero as the frequency separation unbounded . Interestingly , the expression for c , , here that this covariance asymptote given by the term T T is the same regardless of the separation . The of the suggest that , as , increasing the separation between the two receiver antenna the covariance of the channel power gain between any pair of such that and . Moreover , if the E , is which , then and E should vanish resulting asymptotic covariance reduction would be exactly the same that would be by . We now show that , as , the frequency dependent in do vanish as , if O non zero . However , it turns out that the decay is not faster than . Proposition : Suppose Assumption and let the distribute as in Theorem . Then , are the complex series of . It is well known that the are oscillating and that their decay as . Hence , Proposition that the envelope of E as . The decay rate of E with respect on the transform of . For instance , if a deterministic value , then , , and we obtain E e the last equality from theorem and that are the of the series of cos , see in the proof of Proposition below . On the contrary , if a uniformly bounded probability density function , then , when , E goes to zero as or d , but not faster than that . These are formally stated and proved in the following proposition : Proposition : Suppose the of Proposition hold . Then , for every , there such that As a consequence of Proposition , we have that the frequency dependent part of c , , see with increasing , asymptotically , as . Given the behaviour of the and if the series of decay sufficiently fast with , then c , , will decay approximately as a few of the frequency difference O the latter being given by O , since O for , see . Likewise , for a fixed separation , the two of this term decay as O and , respectively , for relatively large of O and . We have derived closed form for the second order statistics of the power gain of indoor . These were for the extended channel model , wherein path arrival times and arrival are clustered . Our reveal that the c , , , associated with two antenna x , x with channel power gains H and H , respectively , is symmetric with respect to and O . Sine the when O is , it that the variance of also as . We have also shown that the dependent part of c , , goes to zero as O to infinity , which also if O non zero and we let . In addition , we have that the reduction of this dependent term approximately proportional to , for a few of the frequency difference O . Proof : Proof of Proposition From the distribution see the statement of Theorem , we can as where and are uniformly distributed over , p , and and are independent and identically distributed according to the cluster arrival angle distribution with probability density function . From this , which . In order to characterize E , we first recall the identity ,. Proof : Proof of Proposition For real valued , it that see , section . , and because is bounded . in directly to , the proof . ﻿ In this work we present an empirical study of the added propagation that may be associated with providing fixed wireless service from near ground base to in a suburban environment . We present for various of , classified according to the existence of in the propagation path and the choice of outdoor outdoor or outdoor indoor service . Our indicate that while on average the additional path associated with lowering the base antenna are relatively small , the variance of these will increase at near ground level , particularly in links . This as a result that the power margin for high availability of a near ground base antenna may be quite significant . Index Channel modeling , fading , fixed wireless service , near ground propagation , path loss . HE explosive growth in wireless demand an intense interest in diverse deployment . New , eager to participate in this very attractive market are considering various , suburban residential where electricity , telephone , cable are being from underground , without the use of . This the need to also evaluate the effectiveness of providing wireless service from outdoor near ground bases . We validate the applicability of well known path loss and small scale fading , which will be useful when designing such . To the best of our knowledge , such have not been in the open literature for this type of environment . Most with near ground bases less than height deal with urban or correspond to sensor in open or forested , as will be in detail below . Suburban have received less attention . Furthermore , as stated in , there is a lack of on the characterization of outdoor indoor wireless links , which are important for voice data transmission and wireless local area . The statistical description of the variation in the channel model , associated with lowering the base station will be useful for a system designer , considering that most currently available data to service provided by bases that are at least at lamp post height , where well established propagation apply . The scenario that is the objective of our study quite significantly from those that have been in the literature before . Therefore the characterization of this new propagation scenario cannot be based on currently known . A thorough bibliographical search of work related to the subject led us to the relevant into . Each category with one specific aspect covered in our study : outdoor indoor propagation , near ground propagation , the effect of vegetation , and path loss . We discuss this classification in what , only those that specifically relate them to our work . Outdoor Indoor Propagation : Various such as and therein have this subject for that in some are similar to ours . However in contrast to our study , in all of them the was at of at least . , while in some , the altitude of the subscriber unit was varied , to not lower than . . We note that due to the considerable difference between the scattering surrounding an outdoor and those in proximity of an indoor , lowering the altitude of the latter cannot be to have the same effect as that of lowering the . However some are similar to those in our work , such as a range of fade for the lower altitude . Near Ground Propagation : This topic been in various , many of which are centered on modeling electromagnetic field propagation , such as . Here the scope is sensor in indoor with both at less than a height and link below . The analytical and empirical address very specific propagation , which can be analytically from electromagnetic and do not lend themselves to the derivation of statistical . Conversely , our study a wide range of of such complexity that they cannot be analytically and instead require statistical such as those in , . Propagation for sensor in an office environment are in , again a setting too far removed from ours to extrapolate valid . for outdoor sensor network propagation with both at low altitude over diverse of open have been in and . In and path for urban low altitude bases are in the context of military . The effect of lowering the subscriber terminal from an altitude of to is in , however this scenario is very different from our application . Nevertheless , among the is the reduction of the factor with antenna altitude , a result to be with that in our work . Effect of Vegetation : Another element that the signal attenuation between base and user is vegetation . Theoretical the effect of these have been in . The effect of vegetation on frequency dispersion was in based on various simulation . Only some of the available theoretical for the attenuation by vegetation have been through empirical data . None of them have been for the residential studied here , but some relate to certain present in our study . In military are considered with bases at exceeding . and links that can involve forested . In this work a decrease in antenna height is also to reduce the factor . Empirical in , , which involve various of vegetation , show excess path between and exceeding . Path Loss : With regard to the statistical description of path loss , single and slope log distance that consider shadow and small scale fading have typically been used . This is also the approach chosen for this work . In the case of outdoor propagation , the two ray model is often considered as a reference , . The presence of a break point leading to the dual slope path loss model been extensively , , . The use of these and the effect of lowering the antenna in a microcellular setting is in , however the considered range between . and . and were carried out on streets rather than in outdoor indoor . The provide a background with regard to methodology and previous theoretical and empirical on modeling propagation links that may involve a terminal at low altitude . As , they do not specifically address the problem that is the objective of our study , namely to draw regarding the effect of providing suburban outdoor outdoor or outdoor indoor residential wireless service from low altitude bases , in contrast to doing so from a conventional height . We here consider both outdoor outdoor and outdoor indoor links , with and without the presence of vegetation . These will be useful when fixed wireless service to suburban , which may also be as a few adjacent in an system . In such of course , the relation between coherence for the specific environment and the transmission will also need to be considered in order to take into account possible fade reduction through frequency diversity . We found that the additional propagation resulting from lowering the base antenna from . to . was not than at the median level , but may grow to . when availability is . We also quantify penetration when serving indoor from the outdoor antenna , and power by vegetation within the link . The latter are relevant when the lowering of the base antenna such an obstruction to the link . The measurement campaign was carried at . a transmitter and a power measuring receiver . The choice of frequency is based on the fact that it been used for fixed wireless service such as . A total of different links were tested in residential urban . For each link , the distance between base and subscriber ranged from to . Two large scale propagation were used as a comparison basis to our empirical model : equation and the two ray model . The remainder of this paper is organized as : Section the measurement hardware and methodology . Section the statistical based on our empirical data . Finally , Section the . The channel sounding system employed of a continuous wave transmitter and a purpose built receiver coupled to a power meter . The receiver is . This is wide enough to capture any frequency dispersion that the transmission , induced for example by movement of vegetation . This receiver was connected to a rotating arm of . length and stepwise under computer control in a displacement of approximately . At each of the angular , consecutive power were made . This consistency and to remove residual temporal . These were found to be very small typically less than . . The resulting was used as the power sample at that range and angular position . At each placement of the rotating arm , the power in a rotation were used to calculate the spatially path loss at that range and to generate the statistics of small scale with respect to that average . The size of the region for the spatial average is well within the shadow fade correlation distance in previous work . In fact the in the literature , corresponding to indoor , are in the range of to , the for outdoor suburban being much , . The operating frequency was . . The and used dipole and patch depending on the type of scenario tested . When the angular spread of in a environment is comparable to the antenna , the received power and thus the calculated will be affected by the antenna gain pattern . For this reason , in the we chose that may be considered representative for the type of service at the specific scenario , as will be detailed later . In the case of the nominally , we took into account in our the minor gain less than over the azimuth range through of the measured antenna pattern . This is in correspondence with the fact that our involve a rotation . In the case where we used patch , in our path loss we considered the measured gain of the antenna in the direction of the direct arrival path . All were measured in an chamber , and measurement were used to ensure repeatability . Before at each environment , two calibration were . First , the transmitter and receiver system were connected back to back with a short , cable and a step attenuator , the , to verify the received power . Next , the transmitter and receiver were connected to the system and a free space calibration was in an open area with the extended . above ground and by . The were to the design of the equipment to confirm its proper operation and to verify the dynamic range for reliable . In all field the received power was at least above the noise floor . were carried out at residential type , representative of a suburban environment where the base station could be at the street curb , at a range of to from a one or two story house . This space was by with and no higher than . We tested suburban in and a Mar , Chile , and on the campus of Mar ´ in ´ iso , which with garden like vegetation outside of ground level . At each of these , multiple were carried out for similar : line of sight : ; outdoor outdoor outdoor indoor . The construction is of the brick and mortar type , with non of size as below . All were made by first the antenna that the wireless service base station at . and then at . at exactly the same spot . This the effect of reducing the antenna altitude . The choice of . as reference height was based on the fact that at such altitude , non links exhibit practically path at the measured , thus providing a convenient reference value . Further in height would have added complexity without providing novel information . outdoor outdoor : In this case , we emulate the terminal by the rotating arm the signal outside the home at from the residence , with link in the range . The in this case is designed to represent a customer terminal mounted on the wall of the residence , being by the . The was in close proximity to an outside wall at an altitude of about . . It was close to a window that would subsequently allow outdoor indoor through that same window without otherwise the setting . In this case , the used a patch antenna with a maximum gain of , typical for a wall mounted element . This was at three different along the wall for each link length tested to measure at nominally similar . The on the rotating arm , whose height was varied from . to . employed a dipole . The setup is in Fig . . outdoor indoor : The setup is shown in Fig . . In this case , the terminal was by the rotating arm inside the construction across a window with respect to the outside the signal . Link ranged from to . The height of the antenna was . , at that would in practice correspond to the possible of indoor or of user . The indoor floor in Fig . was between . and . above ground . The antenna was outside of the residence at adequate for base station , again with of . and . . In this case , both used were . Window sizes varied in width in the range of . to . and in height from . to . . The minimum window area was m . outdoor outdoor and outdoor indoor : These were under the same as in the outdoor outdoor and outdoor indoor respectively , with the only difference that the direct path was by the foliage of one or two of and small . These were usually low , densely foliated of the genus privet , while were typically horse chestnut . The thickness of the foliated obstruction was typically in the range of . to . The link tested ranged from to . This section the of the . We describe for the path loss in each of the previously and we include a thorough statistical description of the effect on the channel model that is a consequence of lowering the base station antenna . outdoor outdoor : We here present the average over one receive antenna rotation . distance for all measured links of this type , at the two base station considered . This is shown in Fig . . In each case the plot as a reference the free space path loss equation and the path loss the two ray model . In the latter case , two for permittivity and conductivity , that cover the range of in the literature have been considered . Although these dielectric are frequency dependent , their change even over of or more will not place them outside the range of considered for our . As seen in Fig . the theoretical two ray path loss model is not very sensitive to the actual dielectric parameter and thus frequency dependent effects will be negligible . The fit of empirical data to the theoretical free space and is remarkably good . The dispersion of the data with respect to the free space model is comparable to the difference between the free space and the two ray model . It should also be that the path plotted here exclude small scale , which as before were out . However as will subsequently be shown , for these the small scale spatial were typically quite shallow high spatial factor . Consequently , the total path loss at any specific antenna position within the rotation is quite close to the average plotted here . It is also interesting to note that the follow the contour of the two ray model particularly at the ground level , even though were made in a variety of , some of which included height of the order of one . In this setting , lowering the base antenna no significant change in path loss , as will be in greater detail in subsection . It is worth that for both , the first Fresnel zone was not blocked . outdoor indoor : As in Section , for in the outdoor indoor scenario , the movable arm antenna was inside the residence at a height of . , user . Several indoor were used , all of them possessing to the outside antenna through a single window . The antenna , outside of the residence , was again at . and at . height . The measured path at both are shown in Fig . , where we also include free space and two ray model path as a reference . As , outdoor indoor path are somewhat than those for the outdoor outdoor case and the dispersion of is also , which may be attributable to the variety of window sizes considered . There is however no evidence that lowering the base antenna will alter the path loss model in a significant way . outdoor outdoor and outdoor indoor : Both considered here correspond to where the direct path was by one or two of typical garden vegetation , basically and small as previously . Fig . the for the outdoor indoor scenario . The scarcity of data between and is produced by the existence of a row of at this distance from the indoor antenna in some of the where were made . Additional vegetation at closer from the window . Therefore , at in excess of were in many by two vegetation . The show added attenuation and dispersion of than in the previous , a logical consequence of the greater variability of the environment . In this case , lowering the base antenna in somewhat greater , as well as greater uncertainty in their . The extensively used log normal model that the spatially path loss in may be as : between the base station and subscriber unit , d is the free space path loss at a distance d in , is the path loss exponent and is a zero mean distributed random variable in with standard deviation . We applied this model to our data after out small scale over one rotation of the arm that the antenna . As conventionally done , we chose d . of the model , multiple or choosing the intercept point d different from the free space path loss did not provide a measurably better fit for the set of link tested , therefore we only used this very simple model . SUMMARY OF PATH LOSS STANDARD VARIOUS OF AND ANTENNA We the empirical Cumulative Distribution Function of the between the best fit linear regression and the measured average path . The of would be that of a zero mean random variable i . e under the assumption that the log normal model . We found that in fact the fit was very good , the corresponding of the not being included here to meet space . The indicate that in general lowering the base antenna will increase the standard deviation of , i . e ., the model path loss prediction becomes more uncertain . established that the log normal model is indeed accurate for our , we summarize in Table I the relevant of the model for all the studied . Our so far have small scale spatial , which as stated were out over the rotation of the arm with the receive antenna . Our analysis of the between the average path loss and the path measured at the various arm revealed that the corresponding are very well by Rice probability . We thus use the factor as a metric to determine the small scale statistics , from the empirical data according to the method in . Fig . the of the for both and for the outdoor outdoor and outdoor indoor , which provided respectively the for the and small scale fade among all tested . As can be seen , no significant in the small scale fade statistics are associated with the in base station altitude . As , small scale spatial are much for the outdoor outdoor case than for the far more complex outdoor indoor environment . We here present the statistics of the difference in path loss associated with lowering the base antenna from the . position to . . We define this difference as where . and . are respectively the path in for base antenna of . and . . These are at exactly the same azimuth position of the rotating arm for both antenna , i . e ., without any small scale path loss . Fig . a the of for the outdoor outdoor and outdoor indoor . As before , these correspond to the two extreme , the falling between the two shown . The ensemble Fig . . of at . and . for outdoor outdoor and outdoor indoor . size for our calculated between and depending on the amount of in each category . As can be seen , for the outdoor outdoor case , lowering the base antenna will result in a slight decrease in path loss when considering the median ensemble value . This is consistent with what can be in Fig . b , which that at some the path loss is with respect to the free space value by the constructive interference of the ground ray . There is a clear increase in the median path loss for the more complex outdoor indoor scenario . For the latter case , as already , there is a variability of path with respect to the mean , particularly at low altitude . The result of this can also be in Fig . a . This figure that a considerable fade margin may need to be added to the link budget if adequate availability is to be when lowering the base antenna . This added margin from about for the outdoor outdoor case to approximately . for the outdoor indoor case at the probability level . In many it may be more informative to have statistical knowledge on the increase in path with respect to a well known and deterministic reference , rather than with respect to at . , which are random . Choosing as reference the free space at the same distance , we thus the statistics of the excess path loss . This is defined as the difference in between the path loss measured at any given azimuth position of the receive antenna and the corresponding from the equation according to Fig . b the of the for the outdoor outdoor and outdoor indoor , for the two antenna considered . Consistent with our previous , for the outdoor outdoor case the of the are quite low for both antenna . At . the is actually somewhat lower than at . . This is consistent with the previously result on the constructive interference from the near ground antenna a of the difference in path loss for antenna of . and . . in Fig . b at some . In contrast , for the outdoor indoor scenario , the is always than at . . As can be seen , to cover of , a fade margin of needs to be added for a base at . , while for a base at . this margin to , i . e . an extra is to achieve the same degree of coverage . This value may appear at first sight to be inconsistent with the . increase in Fig . a . However we note that the statistics of path loss increase in Fig . a are the result of the difference between two random . The increase may occur under where the is high or is low . When percentage of wireless coverage or link , an increase in due to the lowering of the antenna may be of little consequence when the initial value of the is low . In contrast , Fig . b the difference in path at both antenna with respect to an absolute reference . This us to draw on the fade margin with respect to free space propagation at a specific coverage level for both antenna . We have a large amount of statistical data for path loss statistics in suburban , representative of fixed wireless near ground base station . We that for unobstructed outdoor outdoor , with base antenna of . and . , the propagation channel is well by the two ray or even the free space . Our also indicate that the increase in excess path loss over free space propagation , associated with lowering the base antenna is quite modest . Typical are to at the median level and for availability , for all tested , provided all links remain of the same type when lowering the base antenna . However , when we consider all links of all , the will vary over a considerable range . For availability , additional may have to be for an , near ground , outdoor indoor link , while only are if the link is of the outdoor outdoor type . For a system designer this the between providing through a wall mounted outdoor antenna , with additional indoor retransmission hardware considering the need for a significant fade margin to avoid such additional . Both also involve taking into account the associated interference . Extra transmission power should be through link adaptation to limit it to the site specific , while indoor retransmission may need to be to reduce interference between neighboring . ﻿ This work the problem of universal density estimation under an operational data rate constraint . We present a theorem that necessary and sufficient to learn and transmit a memoryless source distribution with arbitrary precision in total , under an asymptotic zero rate regime , in per sample . In the process , we propose a concrete scheme to achieve this learning objective , the Skeleton estimate by . , . This work the problem of universal density estimation under an operational data rate constraint . The basic setting of an agent the sensor observing i . i .. from an unknown distribution with the objective of jointly learning and a finite description of to a second agent the receiver , which that information to construct an estimate . This density estimation and problem taken the attention of the community because of its role in sensor , and because of its strong connection with Making echo of the seminal work of , it is well understood that the problem of universal lossless source is connected with the problem of distribution estimation , as there a one to one correspondence between and finite entropy discrete , in the finite alphabet case . This interplay , however , is less obvious when we move to the source scenario . this issue , recently that connect the problem of fixed rate universal source , with the problem of the source distribution with arbitrary precision , from one point to another , under an asymptotically zero rate operational constraint . This connection was made under the two stage joint modeling and framework . Taking from statistical learning , the data was split in training and testing , where first , the training data is used to construct a finite description of the source distribution first stage , and the second stage the first to pick a with respect to the distribution source code to encode the test data . Remarkably , in this joint modeling framework , the existence of a zero rate consistent estimate of the distribution in total , is sufficient to show the existence of a universal fixed rate source scheme , the distortion rate function , for any given rate , and for any distribution within a bounded parametric family with some regularity , Th . . . This the question of whether there are of non parametric for which this result is also valid . In this work we study in the problem of universal density estimation under an asymptotically constraint . Our main result is a theorem that necessary and sufficient to guarantee that zero rate is achievable for this learning problem . Interestingly , there is a tight connection with the rich collection of L totally bounded . Furthermore , we propose a concrete scheme , the Skeleton estimate by , , , to achieve our objective , which is a concrete demonstration of its information theoretic , something that was by and . and which , to the best of our knowledge , not been before . In the parametric scenario considered in , the Skeleton scheme an optimal learning rate of O p under the regime , where , furthermore , this rate is extended for general non parametric . Let be a separable and complete subset of i . e ., is a Polish subspace of . Let be the collection of probability in , and let denote the set of probability absolutely continuous with respect to the measure . For any , the Radon derivative of with respect to . For the estimation problem the fidelity criterion adopted is the total variational distance . be two probability in . The total variation is given by A absolutely continuous with respect to a measure , by , if for any event A such that A , then A . Consequently is well defined , which is the Radon derivative or density , and furthermore , A , A RA . which is a bounded metric in and been widely adopted in density estimation , . For the case when , to , the ‘ identity ´ a connection between total variation and the L norm of the involved , , more precisely , , with ,, respectively by , : , then , , , . Let : be an indexed collection of of interest . the index set of , which can live , in general , in an infinite dimensional space a scenario . Definition : A , learning rule of a pair of ,, with : and :, a finite set and The composition of these two : the explicit learning rule taking in the set : , which is the reproduction of ,. For an arbitrary learning rule , the operator log , which is the description complexity of the range of , in per sample . Definition : A finite description learning scheme with rate sequence is a collection of learning for all possible finite , i . e ., , : such that , for all . Let X , X ... be independent and identically distributed i . i .. of a measure . In this context , the product measure of the block in , and the entire process distribution of X , X .... Hence , the problem is to study the existence of a universal learning scheme , : , such that its finite description density estimate induced by the data to , in the following sense , In other , we are interested in a zero distortion estimate for the family , a scheme , and consequently , in the necessary and sufficient , if any , that this consistency assumption on the intrinsic complexity of . Definition : Let : be an indexed collection of in ,. We say that the rate is asymptotically achievable for , if there a learning scheme , : , with such that In this case we say that is an rate uniformly consistent estimate for the class . Definition the density inwith zero distortion . We are interested in the zero distortion i . e ., lossless operational point , as it is the standard objective in density estimation , and because it is fundamentally related with the problem of universal source . The focus of the next section , the main of this paper , is to characterize the class of that a scheme for lossless density estimation . Definition : Let be a class of . We say totally bounded if for every , there a finite covering of is the L ball of radius centered at . the positive integer that . is the covering number is the ‘ entropy of the class . Finally , an covering such that , is an Skeleton : Let : be an indexed collection of in with index set that could be an infinite dimensional set in general . Then , there a zero rate uniformly consistent scheme for the class , if and only if , is totally bounded . Hence , the rate zero is achievable with zero distortion for the class , if and only if , is totally bounded . This a concrete correspondence between zero rate density estimation and L totally bounded of . The proof two which are in detail next . For the argument , we present a concrete learning scheme that consistency in the sense of , under the desired zero asymptotic rate . The scheme is based on the Skeleton estimate , Chapter by In what , we use as a short hand for the in , and we define to represent the index set of . The idea of was this collection of probability with a set of measurable in . More precisely , let us define the class of by set of ´ with respect to , . Then the idea is to a the Skeleton index to adopt a minimum distance principle , . More precisely , given i . i .. X ,.., with Xi , the Skeleton estimator is given by , where is the standard empirical distribution . Note that is the minimum distance approximation of with of , the similarity measure in , that is reminiscent of the total variational distance in . The following key theorem a performance bound with respect to the minimum distance decision on the knowledge of the true distribution . THEOREM : For any , This bound of an approximation error and an estimation error , the first and second term on the right hand side of , respectively The approximation error is bounded by the definition of , totally bounded . On the other hand for the estimation error , the use of the ‘ inequality . Note that for any fixed , infinity one can make the estimation error component in arbitrarily small . The beauty of Theorem is that is in particular valid for any and , furthermore , given its finite length nature non asymptotic , it is valid even if the approximation fidelity to is chosen as a function of the amount of data . Consequently , for any sequence of non increasing positive , for all . Here we can consider the sequence that a balance between the estimation and the approximation error , and by doing so , get a consistent estimate of in the sense of . A simpler idea was stated by and . If the classis totally bounded , we can consider the sequence , which is well defined and clearly to zero infinity . Consequently , it To conclude , for any skeleton learning rule in , let us characterize its pair by , for any sequence and for any , where is the empirical distribution induced from the argument . Then the learning scheme the uniform consistency re , which by construction is O . Consequently the skeleton estimate a zero rate lossless learning scheme for the family , which the part . Associated with the learning rule of length , we have its reproduction that we denote by This that for all there , such that for any arbitrary , where by construction . totally bounded , the proof of Theorem . In this section we explore density with extra on top of the totally bounded assumption to achieve the critical O p asymptotic rate of convergence in total variation . On this , we follow the by who , in the context of the minimum distance estimate , of with finite and dimension , also classes , . The following focus exclusively on the skeleton based learning scheme in Section A for the part of Theorem , i . e ., indexed by a sequence of precision . Definition : Let : be an indexed collection of . The class for such collection is given by , Definition in Appendix A and the complexity with Proof of Theorem : We consider the and in Section A . Let us first focus on the convergence rate of the skeleton estimate . First , from Theorem with the class of the Skeleton . It is clear that . Then by for all and for any distribution . Here is where we use the assumption that AT finite dimension , which see the in . and . in that we can achieve the same rate O for the approximation error in if condition is satisfied . Remark : From Definition , is inversely proportional to . In fact , depending of how rich is can go from being , passing from being polynomial in , to being see a number of in and therein . In fact a bound on how tend to infinity as goes to zero , to guarantee zero rate in the learning scheme . It is simple to show with , is sufficient to get log N being o . This is a condition satisfied by a large collection of totally bounded classes in see . The so far are of theoretical interest , because they relay on the Skeleton partition of , which is typically unknown . Moving on the direction to make the Skeleton learning scheme of practical interest , we revisit the scenario studied in , in which : is indexed by , a compact set leaving in a finite dimension space , or what people in learning theory call parametric . Interestingly , in this context we can achieve optimal learning a practical of , induced by a uniform partition of . Let us first start with some . Definition : Let : with . Let IF : be the index function of , that to . IF is said to be locally uniformly , if there and , such , where the ball of radius with respect to the norm in centered at . for some constant . Substituting this result in , Under the of Proposition , let The argument by , a a sub optimal covering of , solution which the intended rate of convergence by see of this construction in Appendix . in . Finally by construction , the rate of the learning rule Then by definition , N e of length is , which to zero by . this last part from Corollary . With this , let this result , by imposing extra our practical learning scheme regularity on and , we and the IF : is locally uniformly , totally bounded . can achieve the optimal rate of convergence to estimate uniformly in . More precisely , by imposing that the class is a class , we can achieve O rate of convergence for the estimation error in and , on the other hand , in a position to integrate the in Section This parametric case is the setting considered by for the problem of fixed rate source and modeling . Theorem , Proposition , Corollary and Remark to state the following implication . THEOREM : Under the of Proposition , let us in addition assume that the collection AT Proof : Let be the covering induced from the uniform partition Appendix . From this we can construct the minimum distance estimate in the class of with index set , i . e ., from : the same in the proof of Theorem , we can obtain an equivalent version of , i . e . from Corollary . To conclude note that the same result to the Skeleton estimate of Section A as . The behavior of the distortion overhead of in , a faster asymptotic rate than its counterpart by O , under the same parametric setting and with the same per sample of O . In addition , an scheme , as its minimum distance decision is carried out on a finite number of . Let be a collection of measurable , and be a sequence . Then we define by the number of different in x , x ,.., n :, and the shatter coefficient is an indicator of the richness dichotomize a finite sequence of in the space , where by definition n . Definition : The is strictly less than n is the and dimension of . If n for all , then the class is said to have infinite dimension . First note in a compact set , , then there a finite ing such that . On the other hand , from the locally uniformly assumption on IF :, there and such that , , , . Then let us consider , then by construction where :, is the ball induced from the total variational , and the last inequality is from the condition . Hence from , there Let , be the uniform that characterize the condition of IF Definition . Without loss of generality , let us assume the critical regime where , hence from is upper bounded by , which is the covering number of see Appendix . As , we will work with a uniform partition of to find a bound for . Let . Then a product type partition , where in each we have uniform length , we have the covering . The number of is , which as a function of . The work of . Silva is by from Grant , Chile .. The work of .. is by from post doc project . , and the project ACT . ﻿ Based on for a street canyon type cell we compare the spectral of various cell interference mitigation . This Zero Forcing , Zero Forcing and . As a reference for comparison we consider and . Out of cell interference , as additive noise , is included in two : a all transmit simultaneously and neighboring transmit in time . We find that , and can offer in spectral efficiency over and by of around under interference limited . This with gains of only around when a standard mode instead of our measured data . This difference is due to the greater inter cell isolation that our street canyon type test environment . We find that over of the spectral efficiency under virtually all operating . Index outdoor to indoor , cell , inter cell interference , spectral efficiency are being to address the explosive demand for higher capacity in wireless , an increase in user density at where cannot cope with the traffic load . Spectral can be further some of the we discuss below . Multiple Input Multiple Output transmission have received great attention . However , inter user interference in a low Signal to Interference plus and corresponding performance loss . This led to the proposal of MU , where transmission or cell interference . In cell , inter cell interference additional on performance . Many to reduce or avoid this interference have been . For example , almost blank can avoid inter cell interference when a small cell pico cell or cell is within a macro cell to address a local traffic . Massive , a large number of at the Base Station to mitigate cell and interference , with a considerable increase in complexity and higher backbone overhead to carry inter cell Channel State Information . A far more elaborate scheme is the transmission , alternatively known as Network , where neighboring encode and decode for multiple simultaneous . Although , in theory , such a scheme can produce very large in throughput , only limited gains have been so far under . In it is shown , based on , that Network no gains with respect to an based scheme if the of the former are considered . In this work we present an based evaluation of for single antenna , i . e ., Multiple Input Single Output , on the case where only cell is available . We discuss below relevant . can be classified into nonlinear or linear . Among the nonlinear , Dirty Paper is a valuable capacity bound , , even though no practical have been . Simpler , suboptimal linear include Zero Forcing and Zero Forcing . In , cell interference is by choosing a matrix that the channel gain matrix and then the user via the water filling algorithm . It been shown that can asymptotically achieve the theoretical limit when considering the case of a large number of . poorly at low Signal to , when spectral are noise rather than interference limited . This effect becomes particularly significant for ill conditioned channel matrices . been to resolve this problem . In this scheme the matrix to be inverted noise dependent that , at low , compensate for the eigenvalue disparity of the channel matrix . Simpler transmission that need little or no at the transmitter include and Time Division Multiple Access . In , cell interference is reduced by separating the coverage sector into smaller through the use of directive . The only feedback is that resulting from the association of a user terminal to a . Such a system , with no inter Fig . . Example of measured scenario for a the cell campaign and the inter cell campaign . user capability , will be limited by cell interference at high transmit power . In , the transmission frame is divided into time , and each user is at full power during one of those time . The capacity gain of over for was in , but without inter cell interference . The in that work are used as reference for our . The above are especially important when outdoor are intended to serve indoor , yet these have only been studied relatively recently . on based outdoor to indoor channel are in , but these were not in the context of MU . Only a limited number of include empirical data in the evaluation of MU . In spectral efficiency is for a distributed transmission system in an indoor environment , while a similar setup Network to compare the spectral efficiency of several , finding that and achieve about a three fold increase in per user data over non transmission and frequency division . In the rate distribution among is for an indoor MU scenario when time , frequency and spatial . In the aggregate capacity in a MU system , and is and with the sum of individual of various single user in outdoor and indoor . Our work is related to the above but inter cell interference and actual cell channel . We evaluate the spectral efficiency of several MU in outdoor to indoor with along the streets , below the serving the of one city block . This from the often used assumption of hexagonal which is unrealistic in our deployment scenario . matrices are measured cell while out of cell interference is included as additive noise , as in , with power calculated a measurement based model . We treat out of cell interference mitigation through two simple . The basic time across . We also include a simplified version of the method in where inter cell interference is by . In particular , we the achievable spectral of and with . The is assumed to serve single antenna simultaneously . power is varied to cover noise and interference limited . Our measured outdoor to indoor scenario , in the next section , from those previously for MU : In the following we describe the measurement setup and the statistical of our test environment . A summary of the various transmission is included in Section . The empirical and their comparison with those based on various channel are in Section , leading to the of our work . Channel were done at ´ Mar ´ campus in ´ iso , Chile , and campus in , Chile . Two measurement were carried out : one at the channel matrices for the cell being by the and another at the interference by neighboring . To obtain the channel matrices within the cell , we used a linear array to emulate an outdoor . It of vertically coaxial spaced half a apart , with a reflective . With the , each antenna a maximum gain of and a half power . This array was along the street at a perpendicular distance from the building wall ranging from to . The antenna corresponding to the possible Subscriber Unit was a single gain vertically coaxial dipole antenna mounted on a long swivel arm . This antenna was rotated step wise in to obtain local statistics . A . , . Continuous Wave signal is through this antenna . For convenience , we measured the propagation transmission . were chosen inside in with outside facing sized . by . , from the outdoor array by between and . The array were at . above ground level , i . e . a height that would allow easy installation by a service provider aiming to illuminate or that are across the street . The indoor antenna was at height on a first floor , i . e , at roughly the same height as the array . The perpendicular distance from the exterior wall to the from to . The placement may be consistent with an access point in a street side room , which can also act as an indoor wireless router . A schematic representation of one measured scenario is shown in Fig . a , where the inside are the of the and the bar the position of the array . the array at various along the direction of the street measuring to at angular of up to off array . The are made of concrete and the glass have steel and aluminum . The were carried out during the day in the absence of pedestrian traffic , to ensure static channel . A shadow antenna not used in is included at each end of the array to preserve the impedance due to mutual coupling in all the . A reference antenna in line with the , at a distance of about from its shadow antenna , measuring the relative phases of the array . A system of any one of three of four to a channel receiver , while the reference signal is permanently connected to the channel . The receiver the carrier frequency to and these are fed to a channel data acquisition system . A computer is to automatically control the of the swivel arm , the switching and the data acquisition . synchronize the transmitter and the channel receiver for phase coherence . Fig . a schematic of the measurement system . The are for at a rate of , per channel , total . This interval is partitioned into contiguous sub of per position of the swivel arm . a Fast Transform algorithm , a value of magnitude and phase is per sub interval . Due to exact synchronization of sampling , the data correspond to an integer number of of the , the without . The existence of consecutive for any transmit receive combination of verification of proper equipment operation and the reduction of residual measurement noise through . We measured a total of of of the outdoor and indoor , i . e . by matrices . As already , in our study we have not considered joint among . Instead we treat the out of cell interference as noise . To estimate this interference power we measured path over a wide range of since it is not a obvious which will cause significant interference . The sounding system was basically the same of the first campaign , except that at the end we used a single antenna , since only the scalar path loss is . We as . Over extending from to we measured the outdoor to outdoor path loss . This included same street as well as around the corner in the grid type street . For a subset of these we also determined the path loss from the to the indoor location that the outdoor position as shown in Fig . . This us to model the outdoor penetration loss . We describe this in further detail in the next section . We found that the outdoor to indoor statistics can be quite accurately by a penetration loss to the corresponding outdoor to outdoor path loss , as in . The based channel data us to obtain the channel gain statistics and in the following section . From these we also assessed and the achievable spectral for the various . These are subsequently to those that would be with various . This is in detail in Section . In this section we statistically characterize the propagation channel for the chosen environment . As will be seen , our are consistent with those in the literature for similar , which that we have chosen that are representative for urban . To model this loss we used both cell and inter cell to compare received power in for by the exterior wall . The average power was from the of the swivel arm , and thus the small scale . The are shown in Fig . . a Measured penetration loss and fit . model . Outdoor to indoor path loss at long . Fig . . Fig . a the difference in measured outdoor and indoor as a function of the incidence angle defined in Fig . . For comparison we show the mean penetration loss of the model . We a version of the model given by to our data , a Minimum Mean Square Error criterion to obtain the best fit for the average penetration loss . These are listed in Table I where is a zero mean random variable , which we found to match a distribution . Its standard deviation was found to be angle dependent , with of . for links growing to . as . The latter correspond to those of inter cell interference links in our street canyon geometry . For cell links the average penetration loss is essentially constant at . , much less than by the model . In Fig . we show measured for outdoor to outdoor and outdoor to indoor links at relevant for inter cell interference . As will be in subsection , for up to the average outdoor path loss for a linear fit model a slope only slightly than that of free space links . The outdoor average path loss was found to have the same slope , but as shown , its are offset by an average penetration loss of . , consistent with . cell links were in general Line Of Sight through a window , with minor in the path . This is often to as Line Of Sight . The large scale path loss is calculated at each transmit receive placement , by again the received power of the of the swivel arm . these we fit a classical log distance model to the path loss in as : where is the path loss at the reference distance d , is the path loss exponent and is the shadow fading term , a zero mean random variable with standard deviation . It is assumed that . The value of is found through a regression fit of the empirical of path loss . The of , are shown in Table . We tested various other . This included the free space path loss model i . e . plus the average cell penetration loss from , a two slope model and an exponential model based on . j Type . The improvement of the fit in of is negligible . Fig . illustrate the comparison . In the same figure we also included for reference the line that to the free space path loss and that by the model for the outdoor to indoor case in urban micro with a grid layout . As will be later , we found that the smaller cell penetration loss with respect to the model had a significant impact on the achievable spectral . We a small proportion less than of path that are lower than those in . This is likely due to effects in our street canyon environment , particularly at shallow incidence . Based on our inter cell measurement campaign , we an outdoor to indoor street canyon path loss model in order to evaluate the inter cell interference from neighboring . We firstly found that a two slope model accurately Fig . . Single slope fit and exponential fit for the measured cell in function of the distance , in logarithmic scale . For comparison , free space and are shown . where the PLout is the outdoor to outdoor path loss , is the break point distance the change in slope and is the corresponding path loss . The outdoor to indoor inter cell path were found to be well by the sum of the average penetration and path from and , respectively , plus a shadow fade term with . standard deviation . We note that for the of incidence that will characterize most inter cell interference , the average penetration loss is . . This is consistent with what been in the literature . Table the of the model . Through the same outdoor to outdoor street canyon we found that Non Line of Sight corner links show a path loss that is at least above that of links for the same distance , which is consistent with . Thus , the interference by around is negligible to that from neighboring same street bases . For this reason , the former are not considered in the performance analysis of Section . Our path loss model does not differ very significantly from previously and we therefore omit further . The small scale fading statistics for the cell links , from any array element to the , were from the complex channel gain corresponding to a rotation of the swivel arm , to their local spatial average . As for links rich in path , we found that a distribution a good fit for the channel gain envelope statistics . The corresponding factor was the two moment method . The average percentage of absolute value error in the fit of the empirical and model Cumulative Distribution was . . Higher were when fitting other commonly used small scale fade To account for possible due to the separation of the array , we the fade statistics per element and subsequently the individual . These were found to be similar , the being by the limited data set size . Following , , we a log normal distribution to the factor statistics , i . e . ,, with its shown in Table . The correlation between the received by the different array of the serving was calculated all . To this effect we each by channel matrix by its norm , in order to combine the data corresponding to with different large scale path . We initially a single exponential model to the as done in , but found that a double exponential model provided a much better fit , which significantly the accuracy in the prediction of the spectral . For example , for the case , the estimation error of the capacity with the single exponential model is , which to when a . The general expression for both is given by where is the correlation between by a spacing of , i . e . to adjoining and , the number of in the array . The corresponding model A ,, r and r were by a least fit , and are listed in Table . with being the component of the matrix , , where is the distance between adjoining expressed in , , , ,..., is a vector and is the steering angle of the signal with respect to the of the array . In our simulation based this angle was as a random variable with a uniform distribution over to cover the range of possible user . is a vector of circularly symmetric zero mean complex random with unit variance , correlated following the procedure in . To this effect we used a For the inter cell propagation model all links are , due to the shallow angle of incidence between the neighboring and the indoor . We found that the small scale in a neighborhood around the antenna are very close to distributed . This the in without a dominant component . The factor the two moment method was essentially zero . Empirical were found on average to differ from a distribution by no more than absolute value . However as will be in greater detail in Section , small scale in the interference calculation was found to have little effect on the resulting spectral . We confirmed this for several and subsequently small scale , which very considerably the . When our measurement based with the above model we proceed as : Step : Choose a a angle theta from the to the . The distance must be chosen in the range from to , and the in the range within with respect to the of the array . Also choose the number the . Step : Calculate the shadow fading and path loss and the cell of Table . Step : Generate a log normal distributed random variable with as in Table . Step : Generate the correlation matrix and the of Table . Step : Calculate by generating a by matrix of i . i .. circularly symmetric zero mean complex random with unit variance and correlate them the correlation matrix and the procedure detailed in . Step : Generate the matrix the chosen angle and the appropriate value of . Step : Calculate . Add the previously path loss according to generate the channel matrix to After generating a channel matrix , the interference by the neighboring to that is by the following : Step : Determine the distance between the neighboring and the street position directly across from the indoor . Step : Choose the Sum Power Constraint and an azimuthal gain the neighboring in the direction of the street position of the previous step . Step : Calculate the shadow fading and path loss to the indoor and with the inter cell from Table , the penetration loss from Table I and the distance calculated in Step . where neigh sin neigh neigh the gain of the antenna array , is a factor to adjust the width of the lobe and neigh is the direct path angle to the street position across from the indoor In order to the same as in our , the lobe width is set at , with . . is the total power and is the path loss between the cell and the user , which is dependent on the by . We compute the per user spectral efficiency aggregate spectral efficiency number of for several a broadcast channel in the . We assume a transmission by the array with . There signal each with a single antenna . Thus , there an by channel , by the column vector , between the transmitter and the th user , with ,...,. The is formed by row into a channel dimension where the random vector is the signal , is the random noise at the receiver and is the total inter cell interference reaching the receiver . The signal is expressed as where u is an independent zero mean complex random vector , is a linear matrix and : is a non linear transformation in the case of , and the identity matrix in the case of and . In all the tested , a is on the power as done in . This is written as : where is the trace of the matrix , wi is the i th column of , is the maximum power and pi is with being the i th element of u and , the complex conjugate operator . The power to each user then is , for ,...,. For our comparison we chose a receiver noise variance set at , which to a of and a receiver noise figure of . As already , the interference from neighboring is as additive is the sum of the interference from all neighboring . The procedure for the calculation of will be in the next Section . We note that as the transmit power , will do so in the same proportion , which will lead to the saturation of the achievable spectral . For our analysis we assume a antenna base and up to . The channel matrices will thus be by , i . e . . When , the knowledge of the equivalent each . If more were available at the , treating interference as noise would be pessimistic in that it the possibility of the interference signal structure in a detection MUD type receiver . We now briefly describe the various transmit considered . This scheme is included as against which to assess the of the below . Each user is during one of with power . We note that in this scheme we are only separating into time within a cell , cell being separately . The achievable spectral efficiency is therefore In a lower bound for spectral efficiency is , which is tight for . This bound is when the best user is all the time with is the capacity technique and it is to be considered as an upper bound of actual performance , given that its implementation is complex and to date there is no cost effective algorithm to implement it . In , there is no a choice for the matrix , and full is at the transmitter . The algorithm this knowledge to avoid , for the th user , the known interference produced by the intended to the , ,..., namely , the previous . In doing so , the block by a transmit the sum random , i , is the information bearing vector intended to the i th user . the covariance matrices Si the maximization problem for the spectral efficiency is as stated in : An efficient numerical method to find the solution to this problem is in , the duality between the and the multiple access channel . This scheme the weight cancel the interference in the . Thus , is , in general , the pseudo inverse of the channel matrix which is assumed full rank : In particular , non singular , is . The spectral efficiency is therefore calculated as are to each user weighting the water filling solution . Although the simplicity in the selection of the scheme attractive , poor performance if the channel matrix is ill conditioned . In these , usually one or a few of the matrix are very large to the rest . At low transmit , where spectral are limited by noise rather than by interference , the solution which sum rate may result in some being a zero data rate . was to correct the problem by in presence of ill . A regularization factor is in the pseudo inverse of , which to normalize the of the matrix , allocate power to all and avoid noise enhancement . In this case , is chosen as with a being the regularization factor . In it is shown that the optimum a for a large number with . Despite not being the optimal value for a finite , for simplicity we will use this value of a . not exactly invert , cell interference will now affect . Thus , the spectral efficiency is calculated as In , the term i the total interference reaching the i th user . are by water filling , an iterative algorithm that the in each iteration considering the cell interference . In this scheme the sector is divided angular of the same width . In practice , this can be done a directive antenna per . To simulate the effect of various of directive in the we took advantage of our channel with the antenna array . This us to generate antenna based on between and dipole . We note that this steering with appropriate , which , however , remain fixed , i . e . which cannot be adaptively according to user . We define the antenna weight matrix as . The available power is distributed equally between and it is assumed that one user is associated with each of them . Then pi , i ,...,. The spectral efficiency of is thus calculated as In this Section we present the main of our work . The general under which we the various are in sub section A . In present the achievable spectral based on the measured data . This , in . and the various cell interference avoidance in . . Finally , in evaluate the spectral channel matrices by various simulation . This , a i . i .. model for cell small scale and our own model in Section . These are with those in Subsection . . our empirical data and we now evaluate the per user spectral efficiency aggregate spectral efficiency number of of , and for a cell system disposed along a street , as shown in Fig . . As a basis for comparison we considered with . In all we have considered perfect knowledge of cell at the serving and a sum power constraint with a range of realistic for the transmit power . In order to establish a for our comparison , we also calculate , as in , the upper bound for capacity , the spectral efficiency for with equal time allocation to and the achievable spectral efficiency when the sum rate is . To avoid , we will henceforth use the term cell when to the system where the time division multiple access only within the cell , in contrast to the case where the among each other , which we denominate time reuse . Although our treatment on cell interference cancellation , for we have additionally included , based on , the case where extra allow mitigation of inter cell interference . We chose a very simple scheme in which the have and the extra of freedom are used to steer towards the being in the adjacent . Given our street canyon geometry this is likely to eliminate the of interference . We treat . Firstly we obtain the achievable performance when full is available across contiguous . We call this system . Alternatively , we consider the case where the information between is limited to channel correlation matrices . Although this is less effective , it will not require such frequent , less burden on the network . We denominate this as . The cell system along a street , as shown in Fig . by . Each cell is assumed to be close to the building facade in the middle of the block and service to the across the street . This closely our measurement scenario . The spectral are for the in the central cell . We found that more interfering in the system did not impact our . Fig . . Topology scheme of the system . Each red towards the city block across the street . The evaluation of the achievable will consider two : no between reuse , and a scheme that time reuse , where adjacent transmit in alternate time to eliminate the source of inter cell interference . For the case of reuse , the achievable in Section are appropriately scaled . At each scenario such as in Fig . we measured at least placement of the array and of the rotating dipole that to possible . Each such combination a by channel matrix , where each row to a possible user position . Since our work a antenna array , multiple of adjoining in the antenna array can be selected . Out of this ensemble we used a subset of for each placement to obtain the statistical description of the channel spectral . We found that further in the number of in negligible of the . Consistent with Release , Rev , we grouped , dividing the coverage region into . We further assume that each is illuminated by a pilot beam of a different frequency the . The corresponding phase are chosen so that in free space the would be in the direction of the center of the corresponding . A power distribution with level suppression was assumed . This choice was based on the fact that this level of suppression good for the case , as will be below . these and the measured channel gains corresponding to each user position , we associated the to the that them with the highest power , thus disjoint . One user is randomly chosen from each group , leading to one possible realization of the by channel matrix . There are however where no user with a , because their are such that all receive more power from one of the other . When this , the number limited to the number of . Given the extensive set of available , this was found to occur only rarely . In such we considered a by channel matrix . The per user spectral efficiency of the is for each by matrix , for a given dividing the by the number of . The from all were then to generate of spectral efficiency for all . The total number of channel matrices used in our statistical was , per placement . In the case of cell , the power is the same as the of the and the aggregate spectral efficiency from is divided by the number of , to obtain the per user spectral efficiency . We found that the interference from neighboring , as additive noise , could be included only the scalar path loss model in Section , i . e . the effect of the small scale . This very considerably simplified and the . To validate this approach , we firstly calculated for a subset of , the spectral for , and with the small scale included . For each placement we considered randomly chosen channel . the for and is straightforward as it only and to take into account that the interference is dependent on the small scale fade affecting each user . For small scale is considerably more complex and to much longer . Following the reasoning in Chapter . , page , it is necessary to obtain the covariance matrices of the neighboring in order to calculate the inter cell interference they generate as in Section .. These covariance matrices are a method in . Then , the received power from one neighboring cell is calculated as where is the channel vector between the neighboring cell and the user in the central cell and is the covariance matrix for the i th user in the neighboring cell . We found that for and , small scale on average in the spectral efficiency by less than . For the case of his difference was less than . Based on this finding we used the simplified approach that small scale and calculated the equivalent noise power due to interference as : where is the interference power due to the i th neighboring cell , calculated as in , i . e . small scale . Optimization of for the Single Cell Case : We evaluate as a reference the spectral of when considering only cell interference . As will be seen later , for this type of interference completely that from neighboring . Since this dominant cell interference on the shape of the radiation that cover the cell , our initial objective is to evaluate this aspect . We found that generating with only is far from optimum and thus we other that more flexibility in and Fig . . Per user spectral efficiency of . , for different number of in the array , at availability . suppression . Both and suppression will affect the interference that the is exposed to . the beam pattern will eventually lead to the sector not being fully covered by the and at the same time the appearance of poorly suppressed , which will contribute to the interference in the neighboring . At the other extreme , very large suppression of in an which may invade the neighboring . For our measurement , we found that a suppression in excess of produced virtually no further with regard to the reduction of interference . The reason for this is that at a certain point the energy scattered from the of a into the adjoining region over that due to the . It from the above that for any antenna array there will be an optimum . To observe this effect , we between and antenna to synthesize radiation with suppression ranging from to . The power was set at , a power level that assured interference limited operation . Fig . the . We have plotted the median per user spectral efficiency for various of directive . In this and in subsequent we will refer to the spectral efficiency available to of as the spectral efficiency at availability . We note that the independent variable chosen for Fig . is the antenna array , which is actually a result of the choice of suppression and number of antenna used in the directive array . As can be seen , more to synthesize the the achievement of higher spectral as it of freedom in the reduction of interference . In show for the median spectral efficiency that can be in our , the optimum choice of for various of directive . We include the relevant that characterize the antenna in free space and the attenuation of the at the sector border . As seen , under interference limited the width must be made much narrower than the sector width to achieve the best possible spectral efficiency . Spectral Efficiency of Cell Interference Reduction : We now evaluate the per user spectral efficiency of the interference reduction in the non cell system , the power limit from to in of . From the of the spectral we then obtain the spectral available to and of . Fig . the . For reference we include to as and cell , both considering inter cell interference . For we used the best possible radiation for both and antenna as previously in Table . When the is limited to , the theoretical capacity upper all other at any power level and any availability . However , and can achieve an important proportion of spectral efficiency . In fact , and at for and availability respectively , while and . The improvement of over , particularly at availability , is attributable to dealing effectively with poorly conditioned channel matrices and high interference . As we will see later , these differ significantly from those through simulation a model with default . Our predict spectral much higher than those from that model . The comparison with the case where the are assumed to have and is shown in Fig . . We here repeated the of and to contrast them with . For the latter we considered with and without inter cell interference mitigation . performance at the expense of added transmit is of course present in the region . However the more significant gains occur as the transmit power where the spectral efficiency of the without inter cell interference cancellation approach saturation around . Full exchange across will of course be best and in our case a relatively modest amount of information exchange . only the channel correlation matrices , which may require less frequent , more limited . a very clear saturation for much lower than the interference . The reason for this is that with growing transmit power , for cell interference spectral efficiency before the effect of neighboring in . This is by the fact that the saturation for these match the best in Fig . , where no cell interference was included . As a result of this interference , will only achieve spectral comparable to the interference in the noise limited case , i . e ., for low transmit . In Fig . . Per user spectral efficiency . power constraint of various for a availability and availability . Fig . . Per user spectral efficiency . power constraint of inter cell interference mitigation for availability . with and and with are shown for comparison . the saturation region it no better than cell , which is particularly simple to implement . In this region , around of spectral efficiency and of spectral efficiency for and availability . As seen in Fig . , the bound in considerably its actual spectral efficiency , which is and of the bound at and availability , respectively . The spectral efficiency gain of over is in without taking into account inter cell interference . It is shown that this gain to one for low and is bounded by min , for high . This gain is shown for our data in Fig . for , and availability as a function of the . We have plotted the spectral efficiency gains for our cell system and , for comparison with the in , for the case when the neighboring are turned off , to as single cell . As seen , the spectral efficiency is always above that of cell , even for low . For high power , the gain asymptotically the bound in the single cell case , but well below this value for the cell case . Since inter cell interference the asymptotic spectral efficiency , we the performance of the above reuse system with the reuse system , considering only the case where the have . Fig . this comparison Fig . . efficiency gain of over cell for , and availability in the single cell and cell , in function of the . for , and antenna . Under our , reuse worse than reuse for and availability . In the case , which is cell interference limited , reuse in a net loss of about half the spectral efficiency at all . It was found that for our data reuse only an advantage over reuse for availability and above in the case of . The reason for the advantage at high availability is that in such the spectral efficiency is limited by a small number of poorly , subject to particularly high inter cell interference . In contrast , for the rest of , the of reuse will not offset the disadvantage of only half the time . Similar have been found for hexagonal macro cellular with such as frequency reuse , fractional frequency reuse ., where it is also found that essentially those few at the between the interference . The proportion of such is even smaller in our linear layout . We also the effect of the inter cell interference on the spectral efficiency of the most exposed to it . For this purpose we grouped the into edge in the external and central in the central . We compare their per user spectral by plotting the Complementary for at of . We this for reuse and reuse . The are shown in Fig . . As seen , in both Fig . . Comparison between reuse and reuse for the per user spectral efficiency . power constraint of , and antenna Fig . . Comparison of of the per user spectral efficiency of for , for edge red and center black when reuse and reuse . reuse is on average a better option than reuse . We illustrate this effect for , as due to the form in which spectral are for , it is not possible to obtain the individual per user separately . In order to test the sensibility of the to the level of inter cell interference , we repeated the above assuming penetration of and . at of exceeding . . As , this in lower spectral and the interference limited zone starting at a slightly lower transmit power . We show this for and in Fig . . In particular , for a maximum penetration loss at availability , and come within of the saturation spectral efficiency at . and . lower than in the . penetration loss . The corresponding for . penetration loss are . and . . Not surprisingly , the benefit of reuse as the penetration loss . In fact we found that at availability , reuse will perform on par with reuse in the saturation region when the penetration loss is . At the same availability , when the penetration loss is . , the spectral of reuse at saturation are around higher than those of reuse for both and . However , reuse is still worse than reuse at availability . Finally we our based with those that are different simulation . This : the model based on our empirical data as in Section , a model based on our see . and combined with small scale i . i .. and two based on the . We compare the per user spectral efficiency at availability . power constraint for and under the same used to obtain the shown in Fig . . The are the empirical setup but the various channel to generate the gain matrices . for the array were , each with a distance between the and the center of the room determined by a uniform random distribution in the range from to . For each placement a set of one per is , all within a range of with respect to the previously chosen distance . are per array placement . The are shown in Fig . . The model considered is in detail in . We by the model with the indoor urban default . We used these for both the cell being and for the interfering neighboring . This is as the default model in Fig . . As seen , this did not yield a good prediction , as it spectral efficiency by a large margin around of empirical spectral . We thus introduce a version that we refer to as , which better our measured . This from the default model in that for the central cell i . e . the cell being we use the outdoor to outdoor model to calculate the path loss , which we combine with outdoor small scale default . For the neighboring we use as before the outdoor to indoor urban scenario as in the model . This choice was by our empirical data . As in Section , the cell path loss for the outdoor to indoor scenario was close to that of a link , but at the same time the were quite small , typically below one . Thus Fig . . Effect of maximum penetration loss on the per user spectral efficiency of and for availability . despite an excess path loss that is much smaller than that of the model , the scenario is still by very rich propagation . The resulting model a better prediction with an error of for . The two based on our empirical data result as would be in the best match and provide added insight into the effect of the channel . The model that only based path loss combined with i . i .. small scale spectral efficiency , but the error is in general not very large . For , it is in the saturation region . Our model the small scale slightly the spectral . We found that the difference between both is essentially due to the inclusion of channel correlation . In fact , when this correlation in our model , the resulting spectral become very close to those of the i . i .. model . This is consistent with what was in this regard in . We have the advantage of cell interference by their spectral with that of , which only interference fixed antenna . We found that for a typical scenario , by a street canyon type setting , the spectral efficiency gains over can reach between and , the exact value depending on the specific system and the percentage of being considered . is limited by cell interference and in fact does not perform better than cell . Among the cell interference , can achieve more than spectral efficiency . Interference from neighboring the performance , but we found that to improve this by alternating the transmission of contiguous in general in a net loss of throughput . Considerable gains are achievable if the interference of the neighboring is , but at the expense of added transmission and extra overhead . Our assumed service environment significantly higher spectral by a factor of or than by the standard model . This is because we that same cell links had significantly less path loss than Fig . . Per user efficiency versus power constraint comparison empirical and data for availability . by the model when the is at indoor free of significant blockage to the for example close to an outdoor facing window . The resulting advantage in spectral efficiency that choosing an adequate position for the in combination with indoor , will provide considerable gains over to directly serve indoor at all . ﻿ In , Theorem . it is that , for a one sided random source , the search for the non anticipative i . e ., causal rate distortion function can be restricted to y which are jointly stationary with x . In this technical report we show that the proof of , Theorem . is invalid because it on , Theorem . , the proof of which , as we also show , The manuscript , Theorem to prove the claim that , for one sided x , the non anticipative i . e ., causal rate distortion function can be by a reconstruction process y which is jointly stationary with x . To do so , it on , Theorem . . In this note we argue that the proof of , Theorem . , and hence that of , Theorem . , are flawed . For that purpose , we will first recall the and in . After that , we will present the in and show , under the stated there , the by , Theorem the basis of , Theorem . of are not met . Throughout , the search in the associated with various of i . e ., causal rate distortion is stated over of joint probability between source and reconstruction as opposed to the usual , in which the search is over conditional , see , Chapter , . Since the distribution of the source is given , it is that for every k k , all the joint to be considered yield the same given distribution of the source for the corresponding block , say . This requirement can be as that , for a set of admissible joint , k where and are , respectively , the to which and belong , and is a algebra over . In , this admissibility requirement is in the definition of the of which meet the distortion constraint , next . The fidelity criterion for every pair of k k is expressed in as to belong to a non empty set of hereafter to as distortion feasible set , k , a condition written as . In this definition , the number an admissible distortion level . Notice that such general formulation of a fidelity criteria does not need a distortion function and does not necessarily involve an expectation . As above , the admissibility requirement is expressed in the in . . The latter equation can be written as In . and . , the distortion feasible are assumed to satisfy the concatenation condition With this , . defined the epsilon entropy of the set of are satisfied . Then . the message generation rate as The analysis in considered both and continuous time , but here we only refer to the discrete time The actual term employed in is epsilon entropy of the message where the term message An alternative message generation rate is also considered in by the set of distortion admissible process as : Definition . The set of all two sided random process for which there exist k k such that and when the limit , where the is taken over all of satisfying the causality The proof of , Theorem . on the claim stated in , Theorem . , namely , that an equality similar to We demonstrate that the proof of , Theorem . is not valid and hence that of , Theorem . is flawed . We do this by showing next that , Theorem . two , namely : a one of the causal considered in it does not coincide with , and the proof of , Theorem . The already first problem of , Theorem . as a basis for , Theorem . na as from the fact that its alternative causal as defined in the text just below equation . in Q , is the set of conditional of y given x such that the causality e although this equality is not explicitly Thanks to , it readily the only causal defined in as an lim is , one must conclude that Re as equivalent to D . However , in view of Definition and , such equivalence is not valid since the distortion feasible of Definition are not compatible with the distortion constraint . it does not mean that . As a consequence , one of the necessary for , Theorem is not shown to hold . The second issue with , Theorem . is the validity of its proof . To begin with , the only argument used in it is that the source is stationary and , Theorem . However , the latter theorem only that , and thus the proof of , Theorem . there is flawed . Although not to in that proof , the reverse inequality in , Lemma . would be all that is to show that . However , the proof of , Lemma . , and then that the claim by taking the over Q , . The problem with this reasoning is that does not follow from . A rigorous reasoning that when taking the limit as Thus , one cannot choose to the of this inequality over Q , and expect the in equality to hold , since one can easily find a pair of whose conditional distribution Unfortunately , the latter is not true since , as already , Q , of random such that E , for all thus reaching the limit distortion from above , and thus such that , for all . Therefore , does not hold . leading to an inequality in the same direction as the one provided by , Theorem , i . e ., that ﻿ The problem of lower on data for closed loop stability been in a variety of . However , the available lead to which are very complex and , thus , of limited practical interest . In this paper , we show how simple only and memoryless entropy scalar can be used to stabilize strongly plant over error free bit rate limited feedback . Despite the simplicity of the building employed , we prove that the data do not exceed absolute lower by more than . per sample . The study of control , i . e ., control with communication , as an active research field during the past see , e .., the special issue . Key within this framework are related to the way in which network affect the stability and performance of control that employ non transparent communication . Typical channel include data rate , random and data . A framework for the treatment of the general analysis or design problem does not exist . Nevertheless , there been significant progress in the study of . For example , data rate have been studied in , e .., . The issue of data been studied in , e .., and random time have been considered in , e .., . In this paper we focus on feedback closed over delay and error free bit rate limited . Within this context , a key result necessary and sufficient on the channel data rate that one to achieve closed loop stability in an appropriate sense ; see , e .., , , and the many therein . This result is given in of a lower bound on the channel which on the unstable plant only over which can be so as to achieve stability . These are quite complex and are not attractive from a practical point of view . On the other hand , showing that the rate at which a stable control system is data is always greater than the bound i . e ., necessity is fairly simple see also , , whereas an actual scheme that stability at any rate above the absolute limit i . e ., the proof of sufficiency is much more involved see , . Clearly , the need to develop the study of simple that achieve close to the in , , , and of that allow one to exploit the when the necessity of the in the construction of . by the discussion above , this paper how simple only and entropy see , e .., can be used to stabilize strongly plant in data which exceed the minimal established in , , by no more than . per sample . The excess rate of our simple scheme is given by the sum of two : a first term due to the divergence of the quantization noise distribution from , and a second term that in the inefficiency of the loss less coder that the binary . In our , the coder and architecture an essential role , which , given the in , e .., , is by no surprising . Our work also light into the why the in are not always consistent with the lower bound on data for stability studied in . The remainder of this paper is organized as : Section the notation used in the paper . and present the considered setup and scheme , respectively . a simplified setting where are . Section the in derive upper on the data that allow one to achieve with the scheme . Section . Due to space , all have been and can be found in or via e mail from the . We define N , , , and . We both the argument of the transform and as the forward shift operator , where the meaning is clear from the context . Given any scalar , magnitude . The set of all discrete time strictly proper real rational transfer is by . Unless otherwise stated , random are always scalar and defined for N , we abbreviate N , , by , and define , . E the expectation operator . The variance , at time instant , of a via ; similarly , a random variable , then its variance . We define , , provided the limit . a wide sense stationary asymptotically process , then its stationary power spectral density and any spectral factor of , a second order one if and only if it finite mean and finite i . e . We say that a random variable is If ,, are continuous resp . discrete random , then resp . the differential resp . discrete entropy of ; resp . the conditional differential discrete entropy of , given ; I ; the mutual information ; I ; the conditional mutual information , given . We recall that , then . In this paper we use in base e . Thus , information is measured in nat . For and basic of the above we refer the reader to . In this paper we are concerned about the stability of a closed loop system built around a discrete time plant model , which a delay and error free data rate limited channel in the feedback path , as shown in Fig . . In that figure , is the plant model , is an controller , is the plant output , u is the plant input , is a reference signal , . In order to make use of the bit rate limited channel , the feedback path an E which binary based on information regarding the plant output . These , which we will denote by , are then sent delay and through the channel . At the end , received to generate the is fed back into the controller . Assumption Plant model : is unstable , no or on the unit circle , is strongly , and its initial state is an independent second order random variable . Assumption Reference and disturbance : second order zero mean that admit rational , and that are mutually uncorrelated . Moreover , Assuming that the plant is strictly proper that the feedback loop in Fig . is well for all causal , and . The assumption regarding the plant initial state for most of interest . The on are not essential , but we have made them to maintain a straightforward presentation see for the general case . Assumption is standard except for the fact that we be non zero . We avoid the case for brevity . For future reference , we define p as the set of unstable plant , and Throughout this paper we adopt the following notion of stability see also , e .., : Definition Mean square stability : Consider a system by ,,, where N ,: , is the system state at time instant , , where is a second order random variable , and the a second order process independent of . We say that the system is mean square stable if and only if there exist finite and finite , , such that Significant work been devoted to the study of the of the control system in Fig . , when arbitrarily complex are employed see , e .., , . However , the study of simple and efficient received much less attention . This is indeed one of the main for the present work . We seek simple , though effective , and . We propose to use the scheme shown in Fig . . In that figure , F is an filter , and , are for the moment abstract that are to exploit the history of their to generate their corresponding . More precisely , for every N , where and are possibly stochastic that may depend explicitly upon time , and where the range of is a collection of prefix free binary see , e .., . Note that the resulting control loop is well if F . The scheme defined above is a restricted instance of much more general . Indeed , it is a special case of a scheme that the history of the plant output and of the received in an arbitrary causal fashion see , e .., , . Assumption scheme : The scheme in Fig . is such that , N , a knowing and does not provide more knowledge about than just knowing , the sequence of i ,, is known at the and is such that can be exactly from and vice . Also , F and the corresponding initial state is an independent second order random variable . At each time the symbol a word of length measured in . We will be interested in the average rate and , accordingly , we define the average data rate as provided the limit . is the average rate at which the are sent trough the channel and , as such , is a measure of the information flow at the physical level . A key question that when considering any scheme is how to characterize lower on the achievable average data . To that end we define the following : Definition : Consider two . We define if the limit the average directed mutual information see also We can now characterize lower on the average data rate for the scheme : Theorem Lower on data : Consider the control architecture in Fig . and the specific scheme in Fig . , where and are as above . If a hold , then I . Theorem a physical quantity , namely average data rate , to an information theoretic quantity , namely average directed mutual information . It is important to note that a different bound on the average data rate would have arisen if we had considered and with different information available . Theorem is a key one . However , it is not straightforward to characterize I unless one suitable on and or , equivalently , on the signal In the next section we will make some . Later , in Section , we will consider a simple instance of and and we will exploit the for the I is sometimes directed mutual information rate . case to provide upper on the associated to that specific scheme , without the . As at the end of Section , we will assume in this section that the following : Assumption : The noise see is an independent second order zero mean i . i .. sequence . The initial of all in Fig . plant and controller are independent second order random , jointly . Consistent with the fact that the the way in which and are chosen , we will consider the variance of , say , as design parameter . Assumption , when combined with the control system in Fig . and the scheme in Fig . , the linear model in Fig . . As long as and hold variance , the control system in Fig . is if and only if is such that the feedback loop in Fig . is well internally stable in the standard deterministic sense see , e .., , . Thus , if we define then is equivalent to provided and hold ; see . It is easy to see that if and only if F is stable , and is an admissible controller for see , e .., . Theorem we can now characterize average directed mutual information in the situation under study : Consider the feedback loop in Fig . and assume that , and hold . If and , where is the stationary of , is the stationary variance of , and is the stationary scheme signal to noise ratio . Equality in a if and only if is constant for every . Corollary an explicit expression for the average directed mutual information across the scheme in the considered situation . Also , it a relationship between the average directed mutual information across the scheme and the corresponding signal to noise ratio . In particular , it from that provided , and hold the scheme signal ratio to an upper bound on the average directed mutual information across it . Moreover , if is a constant , then we have equality in . Hence , under the constraint of constant , the scheme signal to noise ratio also the average directed mutual information across it . We will show below that , in our setting , one can restrict to be constant without loss of generality . Towards that goal , we start with the following theorem : Theorem Directed mutual information for : Suppose that , and . Then : There such that the feedback loop in Fig . is if and only if Any I can be in a loop if one a stable and strictly proper F such that F is minimum phase , is any stable admissible controller for , and is made sufficiently large but finite . Theorem a bound on the directed mutual information across the considered whose satisfaction is necessary and sufficient to achieve . It also a characterization of the controller , the filter F , and the noise variance , that allow one to achieve any average directed mutual information arbitrarily close to the bound established . We can use Theorem to immediately infer that , provided the in Theorem hold , is a necessary condition that average data need to satisfy in order to guarantee when the scheme . We note that we have , for the class of considered plant , the bound on average data for derived in . However , we have not provided a proof of the of this bound . This issue will be in Section . We next explore the minimal stationary scheme signal to noise ratio compatible with . This will enable us to state the main result of this section . Theorem Signal to noise ratio for : Suppose that , and hold . There such that the feedback loop in Fig . is if and only if the stationary scheme signal to noise ratio Any can be in a loop if one as any stable admissible controller for , F is chosen as F , where , , and is made sufficiently large but finite . Corollary : Consider the feedback loop in Fig . and suppose that , and hold . A solution to the problem of finding the minimal stationary scheme signal to noise ratio that a solution to the problem of finding the minimal average directed mutual information across the scheme that . Corollary is one of the main in this paper . Indeed , by virtue of Theorem , Corollary one to conclude that the minimal signal to noise ratio for an immediate lower bound on the average data that allow one to achieve . The key to these in that we consider a architecture with sufficient of freedom . This one to make constant in the limit as , without constraining the minimum achievable directed mutual information across the scheme , or the corresponding minimal achievable signal to noise ratio a simple calculation based on the of Theorem this . We feel that the provided by these are of fundamental importance and , to the best of our knowledge , new . Remark : The work also minimal signal ratio for stability . However , the of constrain themselves to the particular case F , which does not , in general , allow one to achieve the absolute minimal scheme signal to noise ratio in Theorem . Hence , it is not surprising that the in do not always suggest on average data that are consistent with the in , where that exploit the history used . a necessary lower bound on the average data rate that one to guarantee . We have , however , provided no proof of the of this bound . It is well known see , that there exist that allow one to achieve with average data arbitrarily close to the bound in Section . However , since we have chosen a specific scheme that is much simpler than those in , , there no guarantee that we will be able to actually achieve the bound . This the study of upper on the average data rate for applicable to the scheme . In particular , we will use the in study achievable , when a memoryless entropy is used to generate the binary that are sent over the channel . Fig . the architecture of an and its relationship to and in Fig . see , e .., . The is such that , where is the dither signal which is known at both of the channel , a uniform defined via , i for , i , where is the quantization step . At each time instant , is memory and loss by the entropy coder explicit information about and the corresponding binary word is sent over the channel . Upon reception , the , which , the received symbol . Accordingly , the output becomes equal to . Lemma see : Consider an as above . If is an independent sequence of i . i .. random , uniformly distributed on , then the in is distributed according to the distribution of , and the scalar mutual information between and I ; . Remark : The proof in no feedback around the . If there is strictly causal feedback around it as in our case , then the same result see detailed proof in . The in Lemma state that , if one an appropriately , then the difference between the input and output of the , namely , becomes just an i . i .. source , uniformly distributed on each quantization interval as in the classical additive white noise model for quantization ; see , e .., , . This that the use of an one to achieve a the noise source considered in Section except for a different distribution . Therefore , it is sensible to expect that use of an appropriately designed average data close to the in Section . We will show below that this is indeed true . We note that , given the fact that the dither signal is known at both of the channel , choosing as in Lemma that the a i . e ., an is a valid instance of and in Fig . . Theorem Achievable : Consider the control system in Fig . with the scheme in Fig . , where and form an as above . Suppose that the memoryless entropy coder pair inside the see that , and hold , that the controller initial state is an independent second order random variable , and that the dither signal is an independent sequence of i . i .. random , uniformly distributed on . Then , if one as in Theorem Part ; see and , with , then the resulting control system will be and the corresponding average data rate will be upper bounded as where is a continuous and decreasing function of such that lim , lim . Remark are conservative : The upper bound for the average data rate in Theorem is conservative . Indeed , the by are usually closer to the entropy of the source than to the entropy of the source plus see , e .., .. As a consequence , the actual data will be usually close to the expression in Theorem is the main result in this paper . It upper on the average data that guarantee and that are achievable with the scheme in Fig . , when and form a memoryless and when the plant model is strongly . If one as in Part of Theorem , and is chosen sufficiently large but finite , then one will be able to achieve a rate that is no more than per sample i . e ., . per sample away from the absolute bound in , . This additional rate is composed by two : the first one is due to the divergence of the distribution of quantization noise from , and the second one in the inefficiency of the loss less scheme employed to generate the binary . We feel that this extra rate is a fair price to be if one constrain oneself to the conceptually simple considered in this paper . Remark : Note that the in Theorem rely on the in Section . In other , the when lower on the average data for stabilization were key when an actual scheme that a close to that bound . It is also worth that the quantization scheme considered in this paper a well studied building block in the Information Theory literature see , e .., , , . All the above in stark contrast to the approach in , e .., . In this paper , we have studied the mean square stabilization of strongly plant over bit rate limited . We have a simple scheme which only and an entropy . Within this setup , we have shown that the excess data , which derive from this reduced complexity scheme instead of an arbitrarily complex one , are no than . per sample . to more general and to performance related can be found in . This paper the performance of a feedback control loop closed via an error free digital communication channel with transmission delay . The system a discrete time noisy linear plant whose single measurement output is into its single control input by a causal , but otherwise arbitrary , and control scheme . We consider a single input multiple output channel between the controller and the controller which is lossless and random time delay . We derive a lower bound on the minimum average feedback data rate that a certain level of average quadratic performance over all possible of the random delay . For the special case of a constant channel delay , we obtain an upper bound by linear source that attain desired performance with that are at most . per sample greater than the lower bound . We give a numerical example that and operational are increasing of the constant delay . In other , to achieve a specific performance level , greater channel delay spending higher data rate . Taking communication into account for analysis and design proved to be an interesting topic within the area of control theory during recent . This interest is by of communication over point to point wiring and , on the other side , by the complexity that communication impose on classical control . Time delay , packet dropout and data rate quantization are among prominent . an information theoretic approach , , report primary related to system performance . In these works , it is shown that the presence of a finite capacity communication channel in a strictly causal feedback loop a new performance limitation which from conventional Bode formula by a constant channel information rate . Moreover , the derive among entropy rate of internal inside the loop and external outside the loop , resulting in a general performance bound which is affected by finite feedback capacity . Inspired by , , lower and upper are derived on the minimum data rate that a level of quadratic performance in . These works consider noisy linear time invariant with , over an error free digital channel without delay . In particular , that over all causal which represent and control , the average data rate is bounded from below by the directed information rate by the that render the sensor input and control output jointly . Moreover , it is proved in that in an auxiliary structure , the minimum signal to noise ratio which stability and meeting a quadratic performance requirement the lower bound on the desired minimal data rate . For the upper bound analysis , entropy . Such a simple scheme is designed based on the constrained optimization giving the lower bound . Inspired by and , the of present a method based upon semidefinite to characterize the trade off between directed information rate and linear quadratic performance in rate constrained control with fully observable multiple input multiple output . In , the derive a lower bound on the zero delay rate distortion function associated with vector valued Gauss and mean square error distortion constraint . Based on the separation principle , this bound is in fact the lower bound on the minimum data rate for performance in control of fully observable . Then the optimal realization that to the class of vector valued to derive an upper bound on zero delay rate distortion function variable length entropy with lattice quantization . Similar are employed in for on minimum mutual , across a delay free channel , that guarantee specific linear quadratic regulator performance . Specifically , the lower bound based on lower bound and power entropy whereas the upper bound is subject to network induced are generally according to two : robustness and adaptation . The aim in the robustness framework is for certain stability or performance by that do not incorporate time stamp information as a variable . For instance , in , stabilization and H performance for a singular cascade are . Fuzzy model based control is another approach in the robustness framework , where the are based on the size of , and the controller is to be robust over the delay range , . In the adaptation framework , one method is as stochastic switched . The recent on stability and H H performance of jump linear are in and , respectively . The second approach in this framework is predictive control ; a method which is currently quite popular in . According to this technique , the actuator among a sequence of control based on the transmission experienced by them . In all the on system performance , either the effect of channel delay is , or the rate limitation is not taken into account . However , looking into the literature , one can find works investigating performance in with both rate and network induced see , e .., . Even so , a few the approach to treat with such . For example , on the minimum individual non asymptotic rate to guarantee meeting an individual performance requirement boundedness of the maximum ` norm of . In this paper , we study the performance of a discrete time plant with initial state in a loop with exogenous and random or constant channel delay on the feedback path . For the setup with random delay in the channel , we seek the average data rate to achieve a performance level . We show that the average data rate over all possible of the delay is lower bounded by the average directed information rate . We prove for the random channel delay case that under certain , the average directed information rate can be stated in of average power spectral of the involved . We obtain a lower bound on the desired minimal average data rate which is stated as the average of a function of the power spectral of feedback path over all of the delay . To establish all these , we utilize the adopted in and . However , to and , the channel is not delay free in our setup . In other , we extend the information in to the case where there a random time delay between the sensor output and the control input . For the setup with known constant delay in the channel , we show that the above lower bound on the average data rate for quadratic is equal to a function of of the channel over comprised of and with feedback and delay that meet the quadratic performance constraint . Our contribution in this case is showing how the presence of the channel delay the scheme yielding the lower bound . This an insight to the interplay between time delay , average data rate and performance in the considered . We also prove that even over a channel with a constant delay , any admissible performance level can be by an based linear scheme which an average data rate at most approximately . per sample away from the corresponding lower bound . We illustrate via a numerical example that lower and upper as well as empirical and are all increasing of channel delay . This in turn that with demand higher average data to allow for a certain system performance . to our previous works in and , first , we here study the case of random channel delay and second , we employ a simpler proof than information and in and . In this work , we also show the effect of a delay at different in the loop on system . The last departure from our previous is that we incorporate some of into this paper . The remainder of the paper is organized as . Section the notation . Section the main problem . Section the lower bound problem for the setup with random channel delay . lower bound on the desired minimal data rate in the case of constant channel delay . The analysis of upper bound problem in the constant delay case is in Section where the equivalence between with different delay is . A numerical example is given in Section . Finally , Section the By , we denote the set of real whose subset the set of strictly positive real . The set N is defined as N , set of natural . The time index of every considered signal , most , to N . E , log , and . k represent for expectation , natural logarithm , magnitude and H norm , respectively . Moreover , min and are respectively the and of the square which the element on the i th row and th column is by i ,. In addition , is shorthand for ,..., where the th sample of a discrete time signal . Furthermore , for the time dependent set a i , i N , ak is defined as ak , a a . However , if a is a fixed set , then ak , a a Random and are vector valued , unless otherwise stated . account as two random with known marginal and joint probability distribution . Their joint is by , while the marginal by and , respectively . The conditional by and . is the operator for the expectation with respect to the distribution of . We define the differential entropy the conditional differential entropy , and , , , respectively . The mutual information by by I ; and defined as I ; , , log ,. Moreover , the definition of the conditional mutual information between the random given by I ; , I ,; I ;. All the information theoretic in this We call the random process asymptotically wide sense stationary if E and , and E E E hold , where is a finite constant . Accordingly , the steady state covariance matrix and the steady state variance of are defined as , trace , respectively . For the scalar random sequence asymptotically equivalent if and only if they satisfy the following expression for finite : We consider the feedback loop of Fig . where the plant is with one control input and one sensor output by u and , respectively . The disturbed by a zero mean white noise which is by and identity covariance matrix , i . e . I . Moreover , as in Fig . , the plant the vector valued signal upon which the performance measure is . The relationship between the set of and is by a transfer function matrix as : where the dimensionality of each is determined by the of corresponding pair of and . So , , and are the for G , G , G Assumption . . Every entry of the transfer function matrix in is proper with no unstable hidden . Moreover , G , which the single input single output open loop system from u to , is strictly proper . The initial of the plant by x ,..., are jointly with and independent of the disturbance a finite differential entropy . As in Fig . , the output of the plant ,, is into a binary word by the E and over the error free channel . Such transmission is with a random delay . Let denote the delay experienced by the binary word at the . We assume that is an independent and identically distributed i . i .. process which a bounded support at each time step , i . e ., h ,..., , N where hi hi i , ,..., . In order to avoid unnecessary notational complexity and without loss of generality , we set h as h and as . The marginal distribution of the delay is assumed to be known and by where . Such introduce a channel with the following input output relationship : for every , i N . the of by , we can imply form that is a vector comprised of binary which the output of the channel at time . Note that is a random variable depending on the channel delay . We assume that i is at the controller side if i . Moreover , under , binary over the considered channel are not necessarily received in the same order they were . It should be also that the channel does not A more detailed presentation of the feedback path in the of Fig . is provided by Fig . . As , the controller is comprised of a and a lossless component . The where e e the side information at the . : instant , the is assumed to know the time experienced by previous binary and the time delay of the current binary word to be sent over the channel . Therefore , is known at the N . This that yE can be reconstructed perfectly later at the if is by yE and only those of which will be already available at the at time . Note that access to at the at the time is not assured . So the lossless O the binary in which is a sequence the of for which the associated binary will have the by the time , i . e ., yE i : i N , i , i deterministic where . So the of the sequence . Note that since no dropout during data transmission , will certainly have been received at the by the time . In addition , A is a countable set of prefix free binary code , which the input alphabet of the channel at each time instant . On the receiver side , is available as the input to the lossless . This , where is a sequence comprised of of that have time indices less than or equal to the time index of in , i . e ., where , N . Such selection of data for lossless is in accordance , where , an arbitrary deterministic . It should be noted that according to the channel model , is a random variable the of and for all N . Moreover , based on the definition of and , the information provided by is enough for the lossless where is defined as in . Indeed for such reconstruction , the knowledge of the delay is at the . Hence , we further assume that the is provided by through for example . Finally , the controller the control input via where the side information available at the at is in the well defined set . So . Moreover ,, tu , is an arbitrary deterministic where tu is the of . It should be noted that o in o o is defined as o , e . We state some additional of the setting above in the following Remark . It can be from that u and are of where for every N . It thus from the definition of and assuming no dropout in the considered channel that . This that the controller access to the and amount of sensor information when the channel delay is zero and , respectively . Remark . It can be from the definition of in that can have at most at each time step . So the number of the that can be received at the at each time instant to the set ,..., . Therefore , since the channel input is a scalar process , a single input multiple output channel . Moreover ,, as a stochastic process , cannot be i . i . because in the considered channel , no binary word is received at the more than once . Assumption . . At each time instant N , the side information pair e , together with , and consequently , are statistically independent of x ,. Therefore , it can be from the dynamics of the system that I u ; hi for any hi ,..., with hi . Moreover , upon knowledge of , di and Si , the is invertible . It that for each i N , there a deterministic such that Remark . In Appendix A , we will prove that for the architecture of Fig . , any and non invertible with E , O , O and , can be by another set of with the same input output relationship and lower average data rate where the is invertible . For the purpose of the information rate in of spectral of the of the system , we use the following notion of stability : Definition . A scalar strongly asymptotically wide sense stationary if its covariance matrix is asymptotically equivalent to the covariance matrix of the wide asymptotically equivalent . Furthermore , in an , all internal are and their cross covariance matrices are asymptotically equivalent to the cross covariance matrices of corresponding to be to . Clearly , ness ness but not vice ; for both and . For each scheme satisfying and rendering the of Fig . , the steady state variance of the a random variable which on the realization of . The same goes for the average data rate . We make explicit such dependence by writing and , and consider the of these over all of as our performance measure and data rate of interest , respectively . Such of performance and rate , support set for possible of the delay . Moreover , and indicate that the average data rate and steady state variance are of delay . Generally speaking , we are interested in finding the minimal Ra for which a bounded is feasible . Let denote the average steady state variance can be , when the random delay , with the , is present in the channel . Hence , is by the average steady state variance all possibly nonlinear and time u that render the of Fig . . Note that is defined as in Remark . Under the condition that Assumption . , where , , and the average state variance of the all of the delay . The feasible set of the optimization problem in is comprised of all controller and controller by , satisfying Remark . It is straightforward to see from that the concatenation of the pair and the channel in the of Fig . is equivalent to a controller pair with the same and side information that a time delay with same as in , on its received data , and that is by a delay free channel . So the system in Fig . is equivalent to the feedback loop of Fig . in which the and the plant are the same and the have the same as in Fig . . The equivalence pointed out in Remark between of Fig . and the of Fig . will assist us a lower bound on the average data rate Ra in the next Section . In this section , we establish a lower bound on Ra . To do so , we derive and that describe the relationship between the flow of information and system performance in the of Fig . . Therefore , we will update fundamental in , for the case where the channel delay is randomly distributed . As the first result , we show how the average data rate Ra is bounded from below in the following theorem . Theorem . Consider the feedback loop in Fig . for which . and . hold . Then where I .;. . conditional mutual information . According to , the average directed information rate across the forward channel u in the of Fig . over all possible of the channel delay . Proof . It can be from , Theorem . that , for each realization h of the , the Based upon the chain rule of mutual information , the bound in can be as where the definition of li is given in Remark . From the dynamics of the plant , we can easily conclude that the sequence is only a function of and , once is given . Furthermore , it from that upon the knowledge of , side and will be the only u i , i N . Latter together with the fact that Assumption . for the system of Fig . yield the conclusion that the rightmost term of to zero , i N . So we have for the of Fig . . Now by both sides of with respect to the delay , as in , and that the feedback loop of Fig . is equivalent to the system of Fig . , based on Remark , our claim immediately . The next lemma that joint of two the directed information rate between them when these are connected through a channel with random delay . Lemma . Suppose that the of Fig . Assumption . and Assumption . . For this system , if ,, u , a jointly second order set of , then the following : where and uG symbolize the u , respectively , in a way that ,, uG , are jointly with the same first and second order cross as ,, u ,. Proof . According to , Lemma . , the directed information rate from sensor output to the where I u and I uG are defined as in . We conclude based on , the dynamics of the plant and the system of Fig . satisfying Assumption . that , , i N . This together with the chain rule of mutual information lead to Now the proof is complete by taking average over all possible of the delay from both sides of and considering that based on Remark , the system of Fig . is equivalent to the feedback loop in Fig . . If the above are stationary as well , then the average directed information rate can be stated in of the average power spectral density of the involved . The next lemma will state such result formally . Lemma . Suppose that the control input u in the of Fig . is for every realization of the channel delay . For each realization , assume that there a in such a way that where is a process that independent . Such a random process is as for each realization of the random delay . Moreover , the steady state power spectral density of u . Proof . It can be from , Lemma . that in the of Fig . , the following in a process with independent and I u is defined As already before , based on the plant dynamics , the knowledge of will render dependent only on and wi for any i N . Moreover , according to , knowing From , it can be that is actually equal to as in for the of Fig . . Now , our claim is given by taking average from both sides of upper and that based on Remark , the in Fig . and Fig . are equivalent . Corollary . Suppose that the of Fig . Assumption . . Then Ra is lower bounded as : where and u are defined as in and the is restricted to all and Assumption . , u with as stated in Lemma . In this section , we consider the same as in Section but with a channel that a known constant delay , say , on the data . The corresponding feedback loop is by Fig . . The problem we investigate here is a special case of the problem in where the channel delay is constant and therefore , there is only one realization for the channel delay . In this case , we consider the notation Ra and . In Appendix A , we prove that finding is feasible if , . We show that in order to obtain a lower bound on , one can minimize the directed information rate over an auxiliary scheme formed of and an channel with feedback and delay . and related to the delay free version of this optimization derived in will be extended to the case with a constant channel delay . We start by a lower bound on the average data the following theorem . Theorem . Suppose that the feedback system of Fig . . and . . Then the average data lower bounded as : where is the directed information rate across the forward channel u with Proof . Considering that at any N for the of Fig . , we can conclude the claim immediately from Theorem . The directed information rate in will be reduced if the involved are jointly . This result is by the following lemma . Lemma . Suppose that . and . hold for the of Fig . . Furthermore , consider ,, u , as a jointly second order set of random . Denote the u by and uG , respectively , where ,, uG , are jointly with the same first and second order cross as ,, u ,. Then Proof . Recall that , N , for the considered case with constant channel delay . The claim immediately from Lemma . It can be from Lemma that by directed information rate over a scheme u jointly , one can obtain a lower bound on . Now , we will show that the directed information rate can be stated in of power spectral of the involved if such meet certain . Moreover , assume that u is jointly and with the sensor output . Then the directed information rate between u expressed as Proof . Immediate from Lemma by that for the of Fig . at every time instant N . It can be from Theorem and Lemma that the rate performance pair by any and control scheme satisfying Assumption . which the of Fig . is attainable with a lower or equal rate if there a scheme that , u jointly with x , while rendering the system . Due to the of x , and the fact that the plant is , a jointly pair , u can be produced by a control scheme comprised of and an noise source . Such a scheme is in Fig . . The of Fig . all of the and that hold for the system of Fig . . However , the arbitrary are by the auxiliary feedback loop of Fig . . In addition , for such an , a channel with noiseless one sample feedback as communication channel . The control scheme in the of Fig . is where is a zero mean white noise with variance and independent of x ,, and By . It should be that Assumption . for the initial x , the the disturbance the of Fig . . Furthermore , the initial of , and the delay are deterministic . As the system in Fig . is a special case of the structure of Fig . , we use for in Fig . that have in the of Fig . . Theorem . If the of Fig . Assumption . and Assumption . and where and represent the steady state variance of z and the steady state power spectral density of u in Fig . , respectively . Moreover , the feasible set for the optimization in is the set comprised of the noise with that render the system of Fig . Theorem that doing the optimization in over the auxiliary system of Fig . , with the channel and delay , will give a lower bound on the minimal data rate to achieve a certain performance level in the arbitrary possibly nonlinear and time structure of Fig . . The following show how the lower bound derived in can be simplified to a bound which is easier to compute . where is fixed and the steady state power spectral density of . Moreover , suppose that the pair , B , J the feedback loop of Fig . internally stable and well . Then for any , there another pair with a filter , say J , and a proper one , say B , that the system of Fig . internally stable and well , and the steady state power spectral density of z in a way that the following : Intuitively speaking , the of Theorem and Lemma imply that can be bounded from below by a logarithmic term as in which is a function of channel in the of Fig . . Such an intuition will assist us with a lower bound which is appealing in the following corollary . Corollary . Take the feedback loop of Fig . into account as an that in which st and symbolize the steady state z in the auxiliary system of Fig . , respectively . For the optimization problem in , a candidate solution is an filter pair , together with noise variance that cause the system in Fig . to become In this section , we show that for any , , one can always find a scheme that with an average data rate which a distance of about . per sample from the theoretical lower bound . For such a scheme , we propose a design approach which the that together with an with feedback and delay , render the directed information rate over the channel equal to the lower bound on . Definition . We call a scheme with input output relationship as in in the constant channel delay case linear if and only if its dynamics can be as : where By proper with deterministic initial condition . Moreover , a zero mean i . i . random sequence independent of x ,. The initial state of the one step delay feedback channel is assumed to be deterministic . The realization of linear source can be carried out by entropy together with . First , an the in which by , we denote a uniform with resolution , : i ; i . Additionally , a dither signal whose access are provided to both and . The and its complementary formalize entropy for the lossless at the and , respectively . The following lemma an interesting property of when being set up in an feedback loop . Lemma . Consider the feedback loop in Fig . and suppose that the plant is by a proper real rational transfer function matrix in which the transfer function from scalar and strictly proper . For such a system , assume that the input output relationship of the in the feedback path is given by with finite and positive quantization step size . Moreover , take the disturbance into account as a white noise process jointly second order with , the initial state of . Then if the an i . i . process with a uniform distribution over , and independent of , , the i . i ., uniformly distributed over , and independent of , . It can be from above that combining the in with the in in a setting as in Fig . will lead to a linear scheme for the of Fig . as long as the same criteria as for the dither in Lemma . If so , the scheme is a linear based scheme . If such a scheme is on the feedback path of the main of Fig . , the average data rate is bounded from above by a certain value which is shown in the following lemma . Lemma . Suppose that Assumption . for the of Fig . . Then the existence of an based linear source scheme rendering the of Fig . is certified in such a way that the average data rate In , the variance of the quantization error noise of the based linear source scheme is set as . Moreover , st the steady state variance of the , through the following theorem , we use the result of Lemma to show that based linear can lead to an upper bound on the desired minimal average data rate . Theorem . Let Assumption . hold for the closed loop system of Fig . . Then for each , , one can always find an based linear source scheme satisfying Assumption . and rendering the feedback loop of Fig . in such a way that is and the average data rate is bounded as In the following remark , we state how the upper bound derived in Theorem can be considered as an upper bound on Ra in the case of random channel delay . Remark . The upper bound in will be an upper bound on Ra in the random channel delay case if and control are linear based designed as in the proof of Theorem for the delay where the have at Fig . : Three possible for the delay component in the case with constant channel delay their sending only for at each time instant N . Clearly , this is due to the fact that at every time step N , is available at the . Such an upper bound does not seem to be tight since imposing a delay of on data is actually a worst case scenario . The derived in this section and the previous section limit the desired average data rate in the of Fig . . In this system , the constant delay is induced by the digital communication channel between the controller and the controller . One concern is the effect of delay location on the derived . The following lemma a step in this issue by showing how the system change when the time delay block is to a different location in the feedback loop of Fig . . Lemma . Consider the of Fig . and two other each of which by moving the delay component in the of Fig . to either the measurement path between the sensor and the controller or the actuation path between the controller and the plant . Fig . the where the time delay in these . Then are not necessarily equivalent across the if the only difference between them is the delay location . However , the equivalence can be assured by the side information to change across the Take the following transfer function into account as the model the generalized the of Fig . : Let us set the disturbance initial x in such a way that Assumption . is satisfied . We calculated lower and upper on as derived in and . For these , we made use of the equivalence between the of Fig . and Fig . , shown in the proof of Lemma , in that we adopted the method in which performance optimization similar to the one for such as the of Fig . . The are for three different of channel delay , , , , with respect a range from to for each . Moreover , we designed actual linear based , and for each the latter interval , we the of Fig . . To do so , we the giving the lower bound on according to the procedure in , Theorem . . The are in Fig . . In this figure , the to as and present the lower Fig . : on in and actual data and for different of time upper on , respectively . We can compare among with different of channel delay as well . As shown , greater is associated with channel delay , as according to . how the change in response to in the delay is one of the main of this simulation study . We can observe from the plotted in Fig . that fixed , increasing the delay will enlarge the on . In other , the greater the delay is , the higher average data rate is to be used in order to achieve a fixed quadratic performance level . Moreover , Fig . that the lower upper bound converge to the minimum data rate for mean square stability as . From , we know that the minimal data rate of the of Fig . is only a function of unstable of the plant . On the other hand , we use the equivalent system of Fig . for the purpose of calculating . So the observation with convergence of to the minimal data rate for stability comes from the fact that time delay into the model of the plant Ga will not affect its unstable . Simulation are in Fig . as well . The to as OR and OE present the average data and by actual linear . Furthermore , sample long have been considered for the dither . The task in all is done by memory less which do not take the past information of the dither into account as prior knowledge for . In addition to the average data rate , the entropy of the output of the been for the setup . The gap of around . per sample between the measured entropy and the lower bound that for each , , , . per sample of the gap between the actual and lower bound is by the with uniform dither and the remainder . per sample to sample by sample . It can be that the actual and have the same as the of in the previous paragraph . The most prominent property is related to the behaviour of the and as a function of channel delay , i . e ., for a system with greater time delay in the channel , In this paper , the trade off between average data rate and performance in control been studied . Two have been , each of which an plant with disturbance and initial , and scalar control input and sensor output . Moreover , both of them have causal , but otherwise arbitrary , on their feedback which are responsible for and control . The only difference between the two considered is the model of the channel that out data transmission between the and the controller . In one case , the digital communication channel is and information to be are exposed to random delay . In the other system , the channel is error free as well but it is and constant delay on data . For the case with random channel delay , we considered for rate and performance which show the average behaviour of the system over all of the delay . We have shown that for such a setup , data rate is lower bounded by average directed information rate from the sensor output to control input , and u are jointly , the average directed information rate would be . Moreover , we have shown that u satisfy certain , the average directed information rate between them is a function of the average power spectral of these over all of the channel delay . We have shown that value of this function over all arbitrary and that cause system have those and lower the average data rate to attain a quadratic performance . For the constant delay case , which is a special case of the system with random channel delay , we by the minimal average data rate that a certain performance level . the fundamental information and derived for the random delay case , we that this desired minimal average data rate is bounded from below when coder and the channel behave as a concatenation of proper and an channel with feedback and delay . Then we that by such with simply linear based , one can achieve any legitimate performance level by actual which are at most . per sample higher than the lower bound . The through the simulation show that and empirical are increasing of channel delay for a fixed performance level . It delay in the channel higher minimal average data rate that is for a certain level of quadratic performance . Future research will concern with finding closed form solution for the lower and upper bound in the case of random channel delay , finding analytic expression for the desired data rate , lower and upper with shorter gap between them , with model Lemma . Consider a scheme through that a non invertible , and let be defined as . For such scheme , assume that u u and f , N , where . Then there another scheme the control input u u with an invertible in such a way that f , N . Proof . Suppose that in represent a non invertible at a way that upon knowledge of and Si , perfect reconstruction of from been possible for all i Let S and S be associated with and respectively . Two possible can occur . In the first case , S and S are unequal , i . e ., S S . known at the at each time step , this case does not contradict the invertibility . That is due to the fact that the knowledge determine whether u is by or . However , the situation is not the same in the case where S S . Since both and are vector valued , that at least one entry of is not equal to the entry with the same dimension in . The corresponding of and that are not equal to each other are by , , , . Since S S , for each , both and have been exposed to the same delay , say , . So if we denote the output of the that to by , then . It should be noted a positive integer which is at most equal to the size of the set As . Let time . The set E , can be defined with exactly the same as E , but different from it in the sense that E only at time with probability . This only at input instead of either or . Let us define , ; . Then in which aa from the definition of entropy and , can be based on the fact that the function is monotonically decreasing , and from the definition of for the scheme E ,. So E , E , for , and consequently f . The above procedure can be for pair with the same as , to make sure that there are no two of the reproduction into one identical u at time instant . Such iteration will then yield an invertible . In other , u i u i and i f i , i . Our main claim now by the above Suppose that in the standard architecture in Fig . ,, x Assumption . . Considering the of x the in which the steady state variance of is the set of all proper which render the system of Fig . internally stable and well . The considered that finding is feasible . Since can be , for every , , there K which for the system of Fig . . K to this system in a stable setting which is a special case of the in Fig . with and where the steady state variance of , is finite . Therefore , since K , it can bring internal stability and well to the feedback loop of Fig . in the presence of any additive noise with steady sate into account as an with finite variance for the system of Fig . . It should be noted that , depend only on K . Now by choosing and the variance for the , there K rendering the of Fig . internally So considering inequality and concavity of logarithm , we can deduce that the problem of finding in is feasible for every . The feasibility of the problem of finding in is immediately from for any . Due to the validity of , one can always find at least one control pair , say and , that while satisfying Assumption . , the of Fig . in such a In and are the of , and u in Fig . , respectively . Moreover , the and in stem from Theorem if in Lemma and Lemma are satisfied . Therefore , , are jointly of , as in Lemma and the steady state power spectral density of as in Lemma . The pair , with stated in Lemma can be by a scheme which in which a noise with zero mean and independent of . Since is a linear and causal , we can redescribe as It from causality in that , and are lower triangular matrices with and on the top left . This together with the fact that , are jointly allow us to conclude that based on transitivity of asymptotic equivalence for and sum of the matrices in , the and are asymptotically equivalent to of lower triangular matrices . Furthermore , as in will bring internal stability and well ness to the corresponding . Now let us set a concatenation of linear with the same behaviour as steady state behaviour of in for the auxiliary system of Fig . . Moreover , suppose that a variance equal to . So based on the asymptotic equivalence between the matrix , choosing , and as above will render the system of Fig . well and internally stable . More specifically , the latter set of and the noise will give to which and converge . Therefore , for the control input u and error signal z in the feedback loop of Fig . , and hold . Then based on Lemma , the directed information rate in the of Fig . can be expressed as First , we can deduce that any pair E , with stated above a counterpart comprised of filter , and the white noise in architecture of Fig . in such a way that I y u I and . Secondly , the main problem is finding the Fig . : The system whose internal stability the internal stability of the auxiliary system in Fig . all E With all of this in mind , it can be from and that the lower bound for would be equal to the rightmost term of which The necessary and sufficient condition for the feedback loop of Fig . to be internally stable and well is that every entry of the transfer function matrix from input ,, , to z , y ,, u in the system of Fig . to . Such a transfer function matrix , which we denote by , is as : Now , let us shift the delay block in the system of Fig . to the plant model in a way that for Such an auxiliary is by Fig . . Except for the plant model , everything Fig . : The auxiliary feedback loop the internal stability of the of Fig . in the feedback loop of Fig . is assumed to be the same as in the system of Fig . . The internal stability and well ness of the feedback loop of Fig . is if and only Fig . to . It is straightforward to see that Ta . So an equivalence between internal stability and well ness of the system of Fig . and the of Fig . . In other , every triplet rendering the feedback loop of Fig . internally stable and well , will bring internal stability and well ness to the of Fig . as well . One other implication of Ta is that an commonly for of Fig . and Fig . will lead to an identical . This is due to the of exposed to and stationary . Furthermore , those lead to the following H norm for and variance of the output z in the of Fig . : in which , . Likewise , the and variance of the the of Fig . is in of H as : and . Therefore , upon the same triplet ,, , the channel and the variance of the output performance will be the same for the of Fig . and Fig . . According to , Lemma . , for any pair , B , J that the feedback loop of Fig . internally stable and well , there another pair with the same as for B , J in this lemma . Then our follow immediately from the above between the of Fig . and the of Fig . . The feasibility of , to , , the existence of a triplet , say , that to for the system of Fig . . In the latter triplet , is assumed to be a proper filter and . This together with the definition Moreover , the triplet with the in Lemma . Therefore , another triplet , say , in such a way that it for the feedback loop of Fig . . Note that is a filter while only needs to be proper . Now the fact that for any , , the definition of in , and the claim of Theorem complete the proof . the transfer function matrix from to in Fig . . Since is related toby , we can conclude of being proper and real rational , and a strictly proper open loop transfer function . Now the via and in mind , we can deduce our claim immediately from , Lemma . . Let us assume that a linear source scheme is in the feedback path of the main system in Fig . . Due to the feasibility of finding , which satisfaction of Assumption . , we can conclude the existence of together with an , say , render the of Fig . . It from some of internal stability that the system will still be stable if one the only as . This that in the case of unity feedback , internal stability and ness are for the open loop system . We come immediately to the conclusion that based on , Corollary . and statistical of the dither in Lemma . Considering the feasibility of finding , of Lemma , lemma , and Lemma , and invertibility of the , we conclude the claim by following the same as in , One of the common feedback loop across the considered in Fig . is the where plant and u ,, and defined as in . Moreover , A , B , B , C , C , D , D , and D are time invariant matrices of appropriate . According to the recursion in , the and of the plant at each time instant i N can be expressed in of initial , disturbance and control as : For the case where the time delay is by the error free digital channel between the controller and the controller , the relationship between the control input and the sensor output is based on . The dynamics by can be where and represent causal , but otherwise arbitrary , at each N . It from that can be stated as an arbitrary function , say , of , i . e ., N , is a function of is a function of , and is a function of . In the second case , it is the link between the controller and the plant that the time delay . For such a setting , e and yield a scheme with following dynamics : It from that in this case , can be expressed as , N , where is an arbitrary which is by and . Substituting such an expression into an by induction , we can ,, and as As the third case , we focus on a structure in which the delay is by the path between the sensor and the controller . In this situation , the scheme is by causal and based on induction , we come to the conclusion that for the closed loop system considered in According to the above , system , sensor output , and the each time instant that such are not necessarily equal across the three studied above if the share the design for and control and side information and have the same initial and exogenous . So of each signal change by the delay component in the of Fig . . However , it is straightforward to see from the structure of the ,, the equivalence over can be under the condition that everything is the same across the except for side information which can be considered as decision variable . and . Interplay between transmission delay , average data rate , and performance in output feedback control over digital communication , in Control Conference , May . and . A Achievable performance of zero delay variable rate in control with channel delay , in th Annual Conference on Decision and Control . ... Han , and Survey on recent in control , on . and . Feedback control under data rate : An overview , and O Network induced in control a survey , . and . Control and communication in real time , of A .. and A . Estimation and control over communication . Springer Science Business .. and . A Feedback control in the presence of noisy : Bode like fundamental of performance , on Automatic Control , vol . , no . , . .. A and . Fundamental of disturbance attenuation in the presence of side information , on automatic control , vol . , no . , . E . I . Silva ,. and A framework for control system design subject to average data rate , on Automatic Control , vol . , no . , . , An achievable data rate region subject to a stationary performance constraint for , E . I . Silva ,. and . A . Encina , A characterization of the minimal average data rate that a given closed loop performance level , on Automatic Control , vol . , no . , . . and . control with minimum directed information : Semidefinite approach , on Automatic Control , vol . , no . , . . A and . Zero delay rate distortion via filtering for vector valued , Journal of Selected in Signal to appear , . . and Rate cost in control , . . Available : : . . v and infinity stabilization for singular cascade control with state delay and disturbance , on Industrial , vol . , no . , . . A O . Yin , and Adaptive indirect fuzzy sliding mode controller for control subject to time network induced time delay , on Fuzzy , vol . , no . , . . Cheng , and Fuzzy model based cost control of nonlinear , . Lam , and . Mao , Stability analysis of continuous time switched with a random switching signal , on Automatic Control , vol . , no . , . . Shi , and Network based robust H H control for linear with two channel random packet and time , on cybernetics , vol . , no . , . .. Pang ,. and Output control for : A model based prediction approach , on Industrial Electronics , vol . , no . , . . Li and . Shi , Network based predictive control for constrained nonlinear with two channel packet , on Industrial Electronics , vol . , no . , . . Wen , and . Cheng , Wide area damping controller for power system : A predictive control approach , on Control Technology , vol . , no . , . . ` in controller design for with delay and quantization , in th Conference on .. Han , and . Yang , Optimal communication network based H control with packet for a class of discrete time neural with distributed time delay , on neural and learning E . and control under round robin communication protocol , .. A .. Teel ,. Van de , and control with communication : between transmission , and performance , on Automatic control , vol . , no . , . and .. Wang , On the rate cost of linear control with random communication , in International Symposium on Information Theory , June . .. Cover and . A of information theory . Sons , . . E . I . Silva , and Fundamental and mutual and directed in closed loop , . . Available : : . . H H controller design for input delay and preview based on state decomposition approach . dissertation , Department of Human , Metropolitan University , Japan , . E Control and communication with signal to noise ratio . dissertation , Department of .. om ,¨ Introduction to stochastic control theory . Courier Corporation , . .. Gray , and circulant matrices : A review , and in and Information . A A course in H control theory . Berlin ; New York : Springer , . ﻿ This paper control closed over noiseless digital . We focus on noisy linear with stationary , initial state , scalar valued control and sensor . For this set up , we show that the absolute minimal directed information rate that one to achieve a level of performance not necessarily stationary , over all of controller is when the output is jointly with the other in the system . This directed information rate lower the achievable operational data . When our attention to controller which make the random in the loop strongly asymptotically wide sense stationary , this bound can be expressed in of their asymptotic power spectral . Then we show that the directed information rate and stationary performance of any such scheme can be when the , channel , controller and behave as an channel with . We also present a simple scheme that one to achieve operational average data that are at most approximately . away from the derived lower bound , while satisfying the performance constraint . A numerical example is to illustrate our . Index control ; optimal control ; average data rate ; information theory ; signal to noise ratio . This paper control for linear time invariant where communication place over a digital communication channel . Such have received much attention in the recent literature , . This interest is by the theoretical inherent to control subject to data rate , and by the many practical that the understanding of fundamental in such a set up may have some are in , e .. . The literature on control subject to can be broadly classified into two . A first group , which , that are rooted in non linear control theory . An alternative approach that information theoretic been adopted in , e .., . A key question by the works in the latter group is how to extend , or adapt if necessary , standard information theoretic to reveal fundamental in data rate limited feedback . Related have been in , where the interplay between information and disturbance attenuation is . The most basic question in a data rate limited feedback control framework is whether closed loop stabilization is possible or not . Indeed , stabilization is possible only if the channel data rate is sufficiently large , . These early several works that study minimal data rate for stabilization and observability see , e .., , . A fundamental result was in . For noisy over a noiseless digital , it is shown in that it is possible to find causal , and such that the resulting closed loop system is mean square stable , if and only if the average data rate is greater than the sum of the logarithm of the absolute value of the unstable plant . A thorough discussion of this and related work can be found in the survey paper . Recent , stabilization over time , are in . It is fair to state that , for , stabilization subject to data rate are well understood . However , the question of what is the best closed loop performance that is achievable with a given data rate is largely open . Such are related to causal and zero delay rate distortion see , e .., . In the latter context , the best are , to our knowledge , algorithmic in nature , derived for open loop and , at times , rely on arbitrarily long , . It thus that the in the above are not immediately applicable to feedback control . In the rate constrained control literature , lower on the mean square norm of the plant state have been derived which show that , when are present , closed loop performance becomes arbitrarily poor when the feedback data rate the minimum for stability , . This result no matter how the coder , and controller are designed . Unfortunately , the in , do not seem to be tight in general . In contrast , for fully observable noiseless with bounded initial state , that one can essentially recover the best non performance with data arbitrarily close to the minimum average data rate for stabilization . Other valid in the noiseless or bounded support noise can be found in , e .., . Relevant work on optimal control subject to rate , and dealing with unbounded support noise , include , . Those works establish for separation and certainty equivalence in the context of quadratic stochastic for fully , when data rate are present in the feedback path . It is shown in that , provided the a recursive structure , certainty equivalence and a partial separation principle hold . The latter result is relevant . However , does not give a practical characterization of optimal . The in share a similar drawback . Indeed , performance related in are in of the sequential function , which is difficult to compute in general . Moreover , even for the where an expression for such function is available , it is not clear whether the sequential rate distortion function is tight , Section . Partial separation in optimal control been recently in . Additional related to the performance of control subject to data rate are in , and . In , noiseless state estimation subject to data rate are studied . The case most relevant to this work an asymptotic in time quadratic criterion to measure the state reconstruction error . For such a measure , it is shown in that the bound established in is sufficient to achieve any asymptotic distortion level . This is , however , at the expense of arbitrarily large estimation for any given finite time . On the other hand , non linear stochastic control over noisy , and a functional i . e ., not explicit characterization of the optimal control is . In turn , a intensive iterative method for and controller design for over noisy discrete memoryless . for separation and certainty equivalence are also in for some specific set . In this paper , we focus on the feedback control of noisy , with one dimensional control and sensor , that are over an error free and delay free digital channel . The plant initial state and the disturbance assumed to be jointly . By considering causal but otherwise unconstrained , we study the minimal operational average data rate , say , that that the steady state variance of an error signal is below a level . Our approach is mainly information theoretic and thus some of our complement previous in , . We have previously this problem in and . In we have shown that is lower bounded by the directed information rate I u , u are the input to the and output from the , respectively . Then , for a restricted class of , independent by as a unit transfer function u plus additive wide sense stationary noise independent of , we that I u is only u are jointly . For the latter case , it was shown that this information rate can be written as where is the asymptotic power spectral density of u and is the asymptotic variance of the error in u i from u u i and i . It was also shown that an operational average data rate exceeding I u by less than approximately . sample was achievable by an entropy uniform . In , and also for the class of independent , we then derived the minimum feedback directed information rate I u for an asymptotic quadratic performance measure . An important departure of this paper from our previous work is that here the is not constrained to exhibit a unit transfer function u i . e ., it is not restricted to be an independent scheme . As a result , the pair also as a controller for the plant , and thus reaching designing the jointly optimal controller system . For this context , the main of this paper can be as : We show that , for any given performance , I u is if and only if u jointly in Section . For the jointly case , we also show that I for the class of yielding strongly asymptotic wide sense stationary u and . This class namely , is much than and the family of independent . For instance , it for controller built any combination of linear and non linear causal , provided the behaviour is . This result is in Section . In Section we show that the asymptotic of any scheme can be also by a set of and an exogenous additive white noise . In use the latter result to show how to minimize I u within the class of by a related stochastic control problem subject to an constraint in the feedback channel Section . This same constrained problem been in and in for different but related control subject to , see , e .., . the fact that the latter problem was shown to be convex in , and the convenient procedure to solve it in , we explain how to design a simple controller scheme which within approximately . sample of within the class of , for any performance . This result is in Section . To illustrate the above , section a numerical example . Concluding are in Section . Notation : the set of real , the set of strictly positive real N , ,. In this paper , log for natural logarithm , and for the magnitude absolute value of . We work in discrete time and the time index . An said to be proper i . e ., causal if its transfer function remains finite when , and it is said if it is proper and . We define the set U as the set of all proper and stable with that are also stable and proper . In this paper , all random are defined for N . All random and are assumed to be , unless stated otherwise . Given a process , we denote its sample by and use as shorthand for ,...,. We say that a random process is a one if it first and second order that are bounded for that also remain bounded as . are , by definition , second order . We use E to denote the expectation operator . A said to be asymptotically wide sense stationary if and only if there exist and a function , both independent of the statistics of , such that E and E E E for . The steady state spectral density of an process is by and defined as the transform of extended for according to . The corresponding steady state covariance matrix is by , and trace . Jointly second order and jointly are defined in the obvious way . The covariance matrix of a random sequence is by E un , where un u u . For a matrix A , the notation A , to the element of A on the th row , th column , while A and A denote the of A with the and magnitude , respectively . Two of matrices , with An , , are said to be asymptotically equivalent see if the following two are met : for some . useful notation and from Information Theory . This paper on the control system of Fig . . In that figure , is an plant , e u is the control input , is a sensor output , e is a signal related to closed loop performance , and is a disturbance . The feedback path in Fig . a digital channel and thus quantization becomes mandatory . This task is carried out by an whose output to a sequence of binary . These are then over the channel , and back into real by a . The and also embody a controller for the plant . where are proper transfer of suitable . We will make use of the following . Assumption . : is a proper plant , free of unstable hidden , such that the open loop transfer function from u to i . e ., P in is single input single output and strictly proper . The initial state of the plant , say , and the jointly , is zero mean white noise with unit variance I , and finite differential entropy i . e ., the variance of is positive definite . We focus on error free zero delay digital and denote the channel input alphabet by , a countable set of prefix free binary . Whenever the channel input symbol to , the corresponding channel output is given by . The length of is by , and the average data rate across the channel is thus defined as We assume the to be an arbitrary hence possibly non linear and time causal system such that the channel input where ak is shorthand for a ,..., a , SE side information that becomes available at the at time instant , and is a possibly non linear and time deterministic whose range is a subset of . Similarly , we assume that the is such that the plant input u is given by where side information that becomes available at the at time instant , and is a possibly nonlinear and time deterministic . Assumption . : The E Fig . are causal , possibly time or non linear , by . The side information SE and are jointly independent of ,, and the is invertible upon knowledge of and , i . e ., i N , there a deterministic i such that . The assumption on the side information is by the requirement that causal and use only past and present input , and additional information not related to the message being sent , to construct their current see also page in . On the other hand , if , for some E and , the is not invertible , then one can always define an alternative and pair , where the is invertible , yielding the same input output relationship as E and , but a lower average data rate , Lemma . . Accordingly , one can focus , without loss of generality , on where the is invertible . Definition . : We say that the of Fig . is asymptotically wide sense stationary if and only if the state of the plant , the output , the control input u , and the disturbance , are jointly second order . Remark . : The notion of stability above is than the usual notion of mean square stability where only N E is to hold In what we will be interested on information in of the asymptotic spectral of the in the system . To do so , it will be necessary to use a notion of asymptotic wide sense : Definition . Strongly Process : An scalar random process u which to a process u is said to be strongly asymptotically wide sense stationary if the are asymptotically equivalent . Likewise , a is said to be if the covariance and cross covariance matrices of all the in it are asymptotically equivalent to their stationary . Clearly an is also , but the converse may not be true , in general . The same for . The goal of this paper is to characterize , for the of Fig . , the minimal average data a given performance level as measured by the steady state variance of the output e . We denote by the steady state variance of e that can be by setting u , with being a possibly non linear and time deterministic , under the constraint that the resulting feedback loop is . With this definition , we formally state the problem of interest in this paper as : Find , for any , and whenever Assumption . , where se trace , is the steady state covariance matrix of e , and the optimization is carried out with respect to all E satisfy Assumption . and render the resulting . It can be shown that the problem in is feasible for every , see Appendix A . If , then the problem is clearly unfeasible . On the other hand , an infinite average data rate , except for very special . We will thus focus on , without loss of generality . The remainder of this paper within a gap smaller than approximately . per sample . Such characterization is given in of the solution to a constrained quadratic optimal control problem . We also propose and which achieve an average data rate within the above gap , while satisfying the performance constraint on the steady state variance of e . This section that a lower bound on can be by the directed information rate across an auxiliary scheme comprised of and an additive white noise channel with feedback . The starting point of our presentation is a result in , which does not require any . The quantity I u to the directed information rate across the source scheme of Fig . i . e ., between the the output u of the source scheme . Note that I u is a function of the joint statistics u only . We will now derive a lower bound on the directed information rate across the considered scheme , in of the directed information rate that would appear if all the involved were . Lemma . : Consider the of Fig . and suppose that . and . hold . If , in addition , ,,, u are jointly second order , then I u I uG , where and uG are such that , uG are jointly with the same first and second order cross as ,,, u . Proof : Our claim is due to the following chain of and : I u i ; a I , ; i x , o , d ,, , u u and x , o , d , SE , and from Lemma . in Appendix . In turn , equality in since where a , and e hold from the chain rule of mutual information , from b in Theorem . , is a consequence of being a deterministic function of , and from a in Theorem . . This the proof . It from Theorem . and Lemma . that , in order to bound from below , it to minimize the directed information rate that would appear if the source scheme of Figure the channel were by a block u which are jointly . Again , this irrespective of the of the involved . Now we can relate the directed information rate from to uG to their associated spectral . For that purpose and from here on , we shall focus on which render the . Lemma . : Assume that u jointly and that u is and such that , for some . Then , where is the steady state power spectral density of u , and is the steady state variance of the sequence of independent random , defined via u , E u , . Proof : We start by that , since u , are jointly , a simple modification of the proof of Theorem . in ,. the conclusion also and . To proceed , we note that where a from Property in Appendix from the definition of , from Property in and the fact that , by construction , i is a deterministic function of , , and from Property in Appendix i is independent of , . Now , and the definition of directed information rate where a from and in Appendix and the fact that , by construction , is independent of , and from Lemma . in the Appendix and the fact and that u is with Lemma . the directed information rate between in of the spectrum of the process towards which the mutual information is directed . Lemma . Theorem . in , where the author directed information between that are linked by an additive white noise channel with unit transfer function . Thus , Lemma . the latter theorem by considering a channel with noise and with an input output transfer function different from unity . Remark . : It is worth that simply u to be instead of with for all may yield a left hand side of smaller than the term on its right . Indeed , to the best of our knowledge , the only result related to available for is , Lemma . , which an inequality in instead of equality . To see why is not enough for equality , consider the following example : an unstable system with zero initial state that can be by unit feedback . a white process with zero mean and variance . Construct u as gain closed loop with feedback noise . In this case , u can be written as will be with asymptotic power spectral density . Then , the entropy rate of the asymptotic process u is where the last equality from formula Bode Integral Theorem and pi are the of . However , it turns out that , for all , for some lower triangular matrix with along its main diagonal . Therefore , Fig . . Auxiliary system that when the and of Fig . are by an additive white noise channel with one step feedback . In this section we show that , for any given performance , the directed information rate by any scheme can also be by an pair built with only and an exogenous source of white noise . To that end , we begin by that Theorem . and Lemma . readily imply that for any and satisfying Assumption . , and rendering the resulting , I uG , where , uG are such that ,, uG , are jointly with the same first and second order cross as ,, u ,. We also note that the adopted performance measure is quadratic . The above imply that one can always match or improve the rate performance trade off of a given pair by choosing , instead , an and a which , besides rendering the , u , jointly with ,. Since the plant initial state and the disturbance are , and the plant is , one possible way of such pair of u , is by the feedback architecture of Fig . . We formalize these below . Define the auxiliary feedback scheme of Fig . , where everything is as in Fig . except for the fact that we have the link between the plant the plant input u by a set of proper , and , and an additive noise channel with one step feedback and noise such that where for the unit delay . In Fig . , we assume that the plant , the the plant initial state satisfy Assumption . , that the initial of , and of the delay are deterministic , and that is zero mean white noise , independent of ,, and constant variance . In Fig . , we have added as in e to all that refer to that have a counterpart in the scheme of Fig . with possibly different statistics . To streamline our presentation , we adopt the convention that , whenever we refer to the auxiliary feedback system of Figure , it is to be understood that we are implicitly working under the stated in the above paragraph . Theorem . : Consider the of Fig . and suppose that . and . hold . If , , then where the optimization u is with respect to all proper , and auxiliary noise , that render the feedback system of Fig . with internally stable and well , and and se denote the steady state power spectral density of u and the steady state variance e in Fig . , respectively . Proof : Denote by the set of all E that , when at each end of the discrete channel of Fig . satisfy Assumption . , render the of Figure and guarantee that se . Also , define , to be the set of channel which consider a unit gain i . e ., continuous alphabet noisy channel with possibly time linear as which render u and yield se . Since , both and , are non empty ; see Appendix A . The fact existence of at least one pair in , say E ,, and u , such that its average data rate where the last equality is a consequence of Lemma . . u are jointly , their statistics and corresponding variance of e are by an triplet in ,, of a sequence of linear , N , such that . Since is linear and causal , it a relationship between and which can be expressed where and are of lower triangular matrices such that , , and are the top left of and , respectively . Now , since , u are jointly , the covariance matrices , and associated cross covariance matrices are asymptotically equivalent to matrices as well . the transitivity of asymptotic equivalence for and of matrices in , it is possible to show that and must be asymptotically equivalent to a sequence of lower triangular matrices as well see , e .. , Section . . Also , the associated limiting the resulting internally stable and well otherwise the underlying and would not be in ,, and the steady state spectrum of u and the steady state of both and e . Here , we use the fact that is also ; see the proof of Lemma . . Now , consider the auxiliary feedback system of Figure before . Assume that , steady state behaviour of in i . e ., is comprised of two , as impulse the last of variance equal and see previous paragraph . With the , respectively , and that , and , and since the matrix asymptotically equivalent to the sequence , it that the feedback system of Figure is internally stable and well . In particular , it the an set of in the closed loop such that the plant input u a steady state power spectral density that , by construction , in the previous paragraph . Similarly , the error signal e in Figure a steady state variance se that . It thus from Lemma . We thus conclude that , for any and E , in and u , there exist a proper a white noise source such that , when , the mutual information rate I u in Fig . I u while . that is the , it from and that is lower bounded by u as in , the proof . Theorem . that a lower bound on the minimal average data rate that a given performance level , can be by an optimization problem which is stated for the auxiliary feedback system of Fig . , where communication place over an additive white noise channel with feedback . We finish this section by a simpler lower bound on . To that end , we will first state an auxiliary result . Lemma . : Consider the feedback system of Fig . . Fix and define whenever the involved exist where is the steady state power spectral density of . If the pair , , the feedback system of Fig . internally stable and well , then there exist a second pair of , namely , , , with , that also an internally stable and well feedback loop , leaves the steady state power spectral density of e unaltered , and is such that for any arbitrarily small . Proof : Consider Fig . and the partition . Introduce proper transfer Ly and such that Ly see . A standard argument that the feedback system of Fig . is internally stable and well if and only if the transfer n n and e u in Fig . is stable and proper . It is straightforward to see structure shown in the unnumbered equation at the top of the next page , where We will write i to refer to the when , i , i , i , . Similarly , Ly i and wi refer to the of , when i . Set where . Given and the fact thatn is the relative degree U , X , it that U and F , the feedback system of Figure internally stable and well if and only if , does so . It also immediately that , the same stationary spectral density for e than , . To complete the proof , we now propose specific choice for . Denote by i the signal that when , i , i . Write , where is stable and all its in : . Denote by c ,..., the of that lie on the unit circle . Define , for , , By construction , and U for every , . It now , by proceeding as in the proof of Theorem . in , that there , such that setting in that , is such that for any . Corollary . : Consider the of Fig . and suppose that . and . hold . If , , then where the optimization is with respect to all , and auxiliary noise , that render the feedback system of Fig . internally stable and well , and and se denote the steady state of and e in Fig . , respectively . Proof : Consider the feedback system of Figure and recall the definition of both u and in and . Since , the problem of finding u is feasible see Appendix A . Thus , for any , there exist a proper filter , and , such that se and u ,, , where we have used the fact that u whenever . On the other hand , Lemma . that there a pair of proper ,, with , such that the auxiliary feedback system of Figure is internally stable and well , where the inequality from the definition of . Since for any , , our claim is now immediate from Theorem . . Corollary . that a lower bound on can be by first , i . e ., by first , for the auxiliary feedback system of Fig . , the minimal steady state that that the steady state variance of the error signal e is upper bounded by . Section A how to obtain a numerical approximation to . This section that it is indeed possible to achieve any distortion level , while an average data rate that the lower bound on in Corollary . by less than approximately . per sample . Definition . : The source scheme by and is said to be linear if and only if , when used around an error free zero delay digital channel , is such that its output u are related via scalar valued auxiliary , is an independent second order zero mean i . i .. sequence , and the transfer of proper that , together with the unit delay , have deterministic initial . ¦ Remark . : In Definition . , the requirement independent without reference to other random or is to be understood be independent of all exogenous and initial in the feedback system in which the source scheme is . In particular , when an independent source scheme is used in the of Fig . , is to be assumed independent of ,. ¦ The class of linear source is by the of Section and the class of independent source in . We note that independent source do not necessarily satisfy Assumption . . Linear source are defined in of their input output relationship with no regard as to how the channel input is related to the source scheme input . A simple way of making that relationship explicit is by an entropy ; , . When such a device , , and the channel input and output , are related via where is a dither signal available at both the and sides ,: i ; i a uniform with step size , is a an entropy coder i . e ., a loss less whose output symbol is chosen according to the conditional distribution of , given , and is a the entropy that is complementary to the entropy coder at the side . Lemma . Theorem . in : Consider the set up of Figure , where the is as in and a finite quantization step . Assume that is a proper real rational transfer function , that the open loop transfer function single input single output and strictly proper , and that the signal is a white noise sequence jointly second order with the initial state o of . If the dither is i . i .., independent of , and uniformly distributed on , , i . i .., independent of ¦ , and uniformly distributed in , . It that any scheme by and , with dither as in Lemma . , is a linear source scheme . Any such scheme will be to as an based linear source scheme . Figure an based linear source scheme where we have made explicit the fact that , since the channel is error free and zero delay , and , thus , can be at the side without making use of any additional feedback channel . The next lemma an upper bound on the operational average data rate in an based linear source scheme . Lemma . : Consider the of Fig . and suppose that that Assumption . . Then , there an based linear source scheme such that the resulting is . For any such scheme , where is the steady state variance of the auxiliary signal , and is the linear source scheme noise variance see . Proof : Consider the of Fig . and assume that the source scheme is linear . Since Assumption . , there exist that the resulting is internally stable and well one possibility is to to pick internally . For any such choice of , the open loop system with unity feedback . Our claim now immediately upon Corollary . in and the description for the noise in Lemma Theorem . : Consider the of Fig . and suppose that Assumption . . If , , then there an based linear source scheme satisfying Assumption . such that the resulting is , se , and Proof : Since , the problem in is feasible see Appendix A . Thus , there exist the feedback system of Fig . internally stable and well , and , such that , in the scheme of Fig . , and for any , se and Denote the above for , and by , and , respectively . Given Lemma . and inequality , can be assumed to be without loss of generality . Consider the of Fig . and assume that the link u is given by an based linear source scheme with ,, ,, s , and set the initial of , and of the channel feedback delay to zero . The definition of , and , together with Lemma . , guarantee by construction that the that from the above choice of scheme is and that , in addition , the plant output e and the auxiliary have steady state satisfying By Lemma . we also conclude that , for the above based linear source scheme , the average length of the channel input , for some suitable , where we have used . Thus , inequality upon choosing a sufficiently small . To complete the proof , we now show that the source scheme Assumption . . Except for the invertibility of the , the of guarantee that Assumption . note that , in our case , SE . Since is and its initial state is deterministic , knowledge of is equivalent to knowledge of . If one now proceeds as in the proof of Corollary . in , it that one can recover from upon knowledge of . Thus , upon knowledge of , one can recover from and the is invertible as . Remark . : The proof of Theorem . is constructive . Indeed , it a way to build a source scheme that the resulting of Fig . , and se while an average data rate that is upper ¦ bounded by the right hand side of . Fig . . source scheme . If the channel is noiseless and delay free , then and . Theorem . that the lower bound on derived in Corollary . is tight up to per sample i . e ., tight up to approximately . per sample . Whilst the lower bound in Corollary . was derived by an information theoretic argument , the upper bound in on a specific source scheme that suitably chosen in conjunction with an . It from the discussion in that the gap between the derived upper and lower on from two : First , introduce a noise which is uniform and not this to the additional per sample . Second , the scheme works on a sample by sample basis and practical entropy are not perfectly efficient , Chapter this to an additional log per sample . We emphasize , however , that the above gap to a worst case gap and it can be significantly smaller in practice see Section . A key aspect of our is that they are stated in of the solution to the constrained minimization problem in . As such , they highlight the role by in control , and thus complement , e .., where the connection between and other communication been . As already before , a way of a solution to the problem in will be in Section below . Remark . : It is well known that , when causal source of arbitrary complexity are employed , it is possible to mean square stabilize an plant if and only if the corresponding average data than , where pi the unstable plant pole . On the other hand , it is straightforward use Theorem in , in conjunction with the proof of Theorem . , to show that any plant satisfying Assumption . can be in the sense of Definition . by an average data rate that The above observation , for satisfying Assumption . , that it to use an based linear source scheme to achieve stability at which are at most per sample away from the absolute minimal average data rate compatible with stability see also The on in Corollary . and Theorem . are of the minimal in . In this section , we show that the problem of finding is equivalent to an constrained optimal control problem previously in , , . To proceed , we first note that a straightforward manipulation based on Fig . , for any and any render the feedback system of Figure Ly are such that Ly see , and we have used that fact that , internally , is proper and P is assumed to be strictly proper , is stable , We now define , for the feedback system of Figure , the auxiliary problem of finding where the minimization is with respect to all , and auxiliary noise , that render the feedback system of Fig . internally stable and well . Given our , if the unstable , then the problem in is feasible if and only if , where the that is compatible with mean square stability in the feedback system of Fig . see , . stable , then the problem in is feasible if and only if . Lemma . : Consider the of finding both and in and , respectively . Assume , in addition , that the such that P and P then is a strictly decreasing function the inequality constraint in is active at the optimum . If , then is a strictly decreasing function the inequality constraint in can be assumed to be active at the optimum without loss of generality . optimum . Since , is always non negative for any feasible set of , and . Indeed , assume on the contrary that at the optimum . Given , this would imply that or at the optimum . Given our and the definition of , only is possible . However , is not compatible with internal stability when the plant is unstable . In the stable plant case , note that . The latter equality is however unfeasible since , by assumption , Given the above , if , and the plant is unstable or is stable with , then at the optimum . Hence , the performance constraint se in the definition of is equivalent to at the optimum see and . Since is a function of , it that the optimal choice for is such that the inequality constraint is active at the optimum . We now show that is strictly decreasing in . Our guarantee that and hence FLy . By in , and the fact that the optimal choice for equality in , the result immediately . Consider the definition of in . By an argument similar the one used in Part above , it that our imply that one can assume , without loss of generality , that at the optimum see also , . Our now follow by proceeding as in Part above . Lemma . , for almost all of interest , that the inequality in the optimization both and can be assumed to be active at the , without loss of generality . This fact is below to relate the to these . Theorem . : Consider the optimization both and in and , respectively . Assume that ,, that the such that P and P , and that , stable , then . Proof : We will only prove that . Our claim by a similar argument . Since , the problem of finding is feasible . Thus , for any , there exist proper and , and , that render the system of Figure internally stable and well , and guarantee that where we have used Lemma . to write an equality in the constraint . Since the inequality in is valid for any , it that there exist a feasible point for the problem of finding and , in addition , that . The proof of our second claim would follow if we show that is impossible . Assume that is indeed true . Then , there exist decision such that and se . Again , we If , then either the problem of finding is unfeasible unstable plant case or stable plant case . In the latter case , no information can be through the channel . On the other hand , if the plant is stable and and it is optimal to leave the plant in open loop . The above are clearly uninteresting and have thus been from the discussion in Lemma . . use Lemma . to write an equality in the constraint . Thus , we conclude that where the first equality from the fact that the constraint is active at the optimum when calculating . The above inequality the fact that , given our , Lemma . that is a strictly decreasing function of . The proof is thus . Theorem . , for almost all of interest , that the problem of finding in is equivalent to that of finding in . The latter problem was shown to be equivalent to a convex problem in . For doing so , that the problem of finding is equivalent to the open loop causal rate distortion problem which was shown to be convex in . Shortly thereafter , the convexity of the constrained optimal control problem in was re derived independently in , where a formulation more amenable for numerical is . We will thus not delve into the on how to numerically find here , and refer the interested reader to Section . in for . The previous subsection how a numerical characterization of can be . Here , we will briefly comment on the implementation of a source scheme which the desired level of performance , while an average data . In principle , such scheme can be designed as see proof of Theorem . : • Use the procedure in and Theorem . to , and the auxiliary noise variance , • Use these in the based linear source scheme of Fig . and set all initial to zero . Choose the quantization step as , an i . i .. dither signal uniformly distributed on , and independent of ,, and appropriate entropy coder and and , for instance , the algorithm . an the availability of the dither at both the and the sides . Additionally , the entropy coder needs to generate a binary word for each input value according to the conditional probability of that input , given the current dither value . The above are impossible to meet exactly in practice . Indeed , the first one is tantamount to an additional perfect channel for being able to communicate the dither from the to the . The second one would require an uncountable number of , one for each dither value . Leaving finite range and precision aside , the behavior of an can be in practice by synchronized uniformly distributed pseudo random dither , at both the and the from the same seed , and entropy and which work conditioned upon a uniformly version of the dither . By such an approach , all in the of Figure , except for the channel input and output , will have the same statistics as if an ideal was employed . For each possible dither value , one can build the corresponding conditional dictionary in by , for example , the algorithm . The conditional statistics of the for this purpose , can be by the corresponding stationary statistics which can be by simulation . that more than dither only negligible in of rate reduction . The curve Measured entropy of output dither to an empirical estimate of the conditional entropy of the output , given the dither . Our show that our upper bound is loose . This is consistent with the fact that our upper bound was derived by worst case . The gap between the measured rate with and our lower bound is about . per sample , which is smaller than the worst case gap per sample about . per sample . On the other hand the conditional entropy of the output , given the dither , is about . per sample above the lower bound . This that , in our , the . bit per sample gap is composed by about . per sample due to the inefficiency of the considered entropy , and by about . per sample due to the fact that the uniform and not noise . . , converge rapidly as . Thus , whilst an average data rate arbitrarily close to the minimal rate Our show that , as , a closed loop performance arbitrarily close to the best non performance arbitrarily high data . Interestingly , however , for this example , it to use less than per sample to achieve a performance that is essentially identical to the best non performance . It is also interesting to observe that our , and the measured average data and that , is unit variance white noise . By the of upper and lower on for several of . . We also an actual linear source scheme for each considered value for . To that end , we the at the end of Section and where the dither is uniform and perfectly known at both of the , and where the entropy work conditioned upon a version of the dither . The are in Figure . In that figure we plot our upper and lower , and several other which report simulation . All simulation to as Measured in Fig . are over twenty long . In particular , Measured rate no to the average data rate in a case where an tuned entropy coder is employed which does not make use of the knowledge of the dither . Even in this case our upper bound to be rather loose . The curve Measured rate cond . dither to the rate when and entropy coder that works conditioned upon uniformly dither . As our show that the average data rate . suggest that the performance loss when forcing the average data rate to be low might be modest in some . This paper studied control subject to average data rate . In particular , we have a characterization of the minimal feedback directed information rate I u average data rate to within . sample that a level of quadratic performance , over all controller . Our have been derived for that have one scalar control input , one scalar sensor output , and that are subject to stationary and initial . The digital feedback channel considered was assumed to be free of and . Where no besides causality are on the considered , the directed information rate between the output u a known lower bound to the mean operational data rate was shown to be only u are jointly . This , together with the introduction of the notion of strong asymptotic wide sense , us to define a wide class of namely , for which a data rate lower bound in of the asymptotic power spectral u was derived . We then that , for a given stationary performance , the of this lower bound with that of the directed information rate when , channel and are by an channel surrounded by , taking the over all causal which satisfy the same performance constraint . Such insight was then used as motivation for building a source scheme capable of which are less than per sample away from our derived lower bound , while satisfying the desired performance level constraint . Such are based upon entropy and constitute conceptually simple . A numerical example been include to illustrate our proposal . Future work should focus on multiple input and multiple output plant and on ways of reducing the gap between the derived upper and lower on the minimal average data rate that a given performance level . We would like to thank the AE and the anonymous for their careful as well as for their helpful , which to improve the technical presentation of this paper . In this appendix we show sufficient for the optimization in , and to be feasible . We will make extensive use of the definition of in , the related in and , the regarding the feedback scheme of Fig . made on the paragraph preceding Theorem . , and the of and based linear source made in Section . Consider the feedback system of Fig . , where , and satisfy Assumption . , and the such that u for some arbitrary . and all the involved random are , it from well known that the set of all proper which render the the feedback system of Figure internally stable and well . Our that the above problem is feasible . The fact that the problem of finding is feasible , that for every , , there K such that , in Figure , and L , where L is such that K . Since K , the above choice the feedback system of Fig . internally stable and well for any additive noise variance . This that the resulting variance of , say , will be finite . It also that if in Fig . is zero mean with variance , then the of e and of will increase to , and , respectively , for some finite which depend only upon K . As a consequence , for every , there K such that in Fig . and for the above choice of ,, by and as zero mean with variance . It immediately that the above choice of is also such that , in Figure , The latter inequality that the problem of finding in is feasible for any indeed , feasible while yielding all in the system jointly . Now , from inequality and the concavity of log , it also from that the problem of finding in is feasible for any . We end this section by showing that the problem of finding in is also feasible when . To that end , it to consider an based linear source scheme to u in Fig . , with the of the latter choice of see preceding paragraph , our claim by proceeding as in the proof of Theorem . to show that the above defined based linear source scheme Assumption . , the of Figure , and se at a finite average data rate . The following and are standard and , unless otherwise stated , can be found in . We assume all random to have well defined joint probability density . The of , is ,. to the conditional of , given . Ex mean with respect to the distribution of . The differential entropy defined via Ex . The conditional differential entropy of , given , is defined via Ex , . The mutual information between two defined via I ; Ex , log ,. The conditional mutual information , given , is defined via I ; I ,; I ;. The following are of the above : Property , where can be taken to be a deterministic constant , in which case x x . Lemma . : Assume that , are jointly second order random , is , arbitrarily distributed . Then , I ; ; , where is such that , are jointly and have the same first and second order cross as ,. Lemma . : Let ,, be arbitrarily distributed random satisfying the chain Let be jointly random with the same first and second order statistics as ,,. In addition , suppose that E Ly , for some appropriate . Then the chain Proof : The statistics between and ,, imply that E E . The E Ly that E E Ly . With this we obtain that where the last equality is due to . But for jointly , E E if and only if , the proof . Lemma . : Let the random , be such that , for all N and i , Proof : The , are as L , u g , g , L , L , d Mu This that , i si , Li , di for some deterministic i , from where since Lemma . is a version of Lemma . in , since the statement of the latter the existence of a linear that the estimation error Ly is independent of , while Lemma . only E for all . L , , L , d ,..., Li , are sub of the sequence Li , di . Theorem . : Let the random , correspond to those in the feedback system shown in Fig . . Let be jointly with the same second order as Then , for N , uG i , i uG i di , i a Proof : In the scheme of Fig . , the plant causally its di to its output . This that that Li , di for some linear Li , di and , are jointly , and thus E , Li , di , di for some sequence of linear . Hence , we can directly apply Lemma . and obtain from that , which is equivalent to a . The inequality a is due to the chain rule and the of mutual information which also , and since . Starting inequality from the chain rule and the non negativity of mutual information . This the proof . Lemma . : Consider the generic feedback system of Figure , where S is an arbitrary hence possibly non linear and time causal dynamic system with initial state x , o and disturbance d , such that for some possibly non linear and time deterministic S ,, and S is an arbitrary causal dynamic system with disturbance d and initial state x , o , such that for some possibly non linear and time deterministic S ,. If x , o , d are jointly independent of x , o , d , then Lemma . to a version of Theorem . in . Indeed , the latter result use of additional on system S , does not take side information into account , and only that the left hand side of is lower Proof : The definition of an process that and are of asymptotically equivalent matrices . This , together with the fact that , and that log is continuous for all , one to apply , Corollary . to obtain Since the matrices are positive definite with each row being absolutely summable for all , it from the fundamental eigenvalue distribution theorem of see , e .., , Corollary . or Theorem . that ¨ ﻿ In this paper we propose a new approach to robust optimal experiment design . The key departure from work is that we specifically account for the fact that , prior to the experiment , we possess only partial knowledge of the system . We also give a detailed analysis of the solution for a simple case and propose a concave optimization algorithm that can be applied more generally . It is well known that the choice of experimental a strong influence on the accuracy of from system identification . This substantial research on experiment design over almost a century . Early appear in the statistics literature , ; Cox , ; , ; and , ; and , ; , ; Whittle , ; Wynn , . This work was later to the problem of identification of dynamic , ; , ; and , ;.. and , ;.. and , ; and , ; , . Some of the later work is in and , ; , . Our focus here will be on experiment design for dynamic . Early work on this problem predominately on frequency domain . More recently , there been substantial effort devoted to the inter relationship between identification and control together with the associated issue of input signal design and , ; , . However , a major drawback of all the above work is that , generically , the optimal test signal for dynamic system identification is a function of the unknown system i . e . it on the very thing that the experiment is at finding . Indeed , , : It should be noted that , as usual in experiment design , in order to compute the optimal design the true system to be known . that are robust with respect to uncertainty about the system is a wide open research The goal of the current paper is to propose a methodology for this problem . In particular , we formulate a robust optimal experiment design criterion . We also demonstrate the use of this criterion for a simple case . The layout of the remainder of the paper is as : In Section we give a general formulation of the robust optimal experiment design problem . In Section , we focus on a simple one parameter problem so as to give insight into the problem . In Section we convert the problem to an approximate matrix formulation and discuss asymptotic behavior when the prior knowledge is diffuse . In Section we describe an algorithm for the robust optimal experiment and give a numerical example . In Section we describe an extension to parameter . Finally , in Section we draw . Our focus in the current paper is on how to design the experimental so that the information from a particular experiment is in some specific sense . To motivate our approach we consider a single input single output linear discrete time system of the form : G ut G where G , G are rational transfer in the forward shift operator , G and where is white noise of variance . We let where the We recall that the log likelihood function for , is given by Fisher information matrix is by taking the following expectation and , We assume an open loop experiment so that and ut are uncorrelated . We also assume that G , G no common . Taking , as in , we have be partitioned as where M is the part of the information matrix related to and M is independent of the input . Then Notice that M on the full parameter vector . large , it is more convenient to work with the scaled average information matrix for the parameter , i . e . It is also possible to do a parallel development and , for continuous time . In the latter case , is by where G and G are continuous time transfer assumed independently and fu is the continuous time input spectral density . a matrix , we will need a scalar measure the purpose of experiment design . In the nominal case in the literature i . e . when is assumed known , several of the size been . are where , is a frequency dependent vector related to the gap and , . Thus nominal experiment design is at choosing fu to maximize a function of the type shown in , . Note , however , that the optimal input spectrum , inter on the unknown parameter vector . To address this paradox , we propose an alternative robust optimal experiment design procedure . We assume that we do not have complete a prior knowledge of the true parameter value . Instead , we assume that the can take any value in a compact set . We propose that fu be chosen as : any suitable scalar measure of . Note that we also depend explicitly on . This is standard in nominal experiment design , see for example . Also , we can use the explicit dependence on to associate different weighting to , fu depending on the nature of the prior knowledge regarding . We also need to constrain the allowable set of input . A typical constraint used in experiment design is that the input energy is constrained i . e . we define We note that the are independent it only as a scaling factor in . For clarity in the following discussion we assume white noise and hence only refer to the parameter in the sequel . To give insight into the robust optimal experiment design problem , we consider a simple continuous time problem where G and Nominal experiment design that an initial estimate , is available . Based on this information , the function fu is chosen so as to maximize some scalar function of subject to a constraint on the output or the input power . One interesting observation is that and define a convex combination of the set of all single frequency matrices . This to several use , e .. any value of , fu for fu can be by a finite number of . Also , in the scalar parameter case of and it can actually be shown that we need only use a single frequency input for optimal experiment design and , , namely , fu . Moreover , by differentiation it is readily seen that the optimal input frequency is This is an intuitively pleasing result , i . e . one the test signal at the nominal break point . However , equation the fundamental difficulty in nominal experiment design , namely the optimal experiment on the very thing that the experiment is at . Fig . . M , fu as a function of for nominal input , noise solid . To gauge how important the dependence on is , we note our example at the rate of per decade as a function of both and . Hence , given the prior estimate of the . Also , say that the true parameter in say we choose for the input signal proximately th of the nominal value This to suggest that nominal experiment design is limited to those where a good prior estimate is available . A The reason for multiplying by is that is a variance measure and thus relative We next turn to the robust experiment design in Section . For the scalar parameter problem In subsequent , we will give further into the above design problem . Lemma . Consider the problem stated in equation , the optimal input all its energy inside . Namely , Here we develop an algorithm for the robust experiment design problem , as in the last section , where we approximate the integral in equation by a sum . Specifically , Lemma , we We can now state the following discrete alternative to the optimization problem in equation : We next show that if there a that all equal , then E is optimal . negative we must conclude from and that Since by definition , all the of E are nonE which the proof . With this specific choice we have the following result for our original problem , Lemma . The robust optimal test signal for diffuse prior information spectrum approximately given by that for the matrix A in , apart from the first and last few , the row sum is very nearly constant . Namely , the in Lemma are approximately satisfied which the proof . Remark . The immediate consequence of Lemma is that band limited noise is an approximation to the robust optimal input for our example see Figure . We show that the optimization problem can be converted into a standard linear problem . Let us denote then we can readily show that is equivalent to the following optimization problem : We consider the scalar parameter problem in Section where we assume , i A nominal input of frequency Note that this is the optimal input if the initial estimate of the Band limited ‘ f noise input , . , rad sec . The robust optimal input by . We see from Table that noise is approximately an order of magnitude better than a white noise input in of the cost function . Furthermore , going to the true optimum a further improvement . The optimal input energy is shown in Figure and Fig ure the corresponding of M , fu as a function of . It is interesting to note from Figure that M , fu is an almost constant function of . This should be with the result in Lemma . The latter Lemma that if the input that independent of is feasible , then it is optimal . Here , the input which M , fu constant is not feasible but we see from Figure that the optimal of are almost constant . expression for , given in and . We can again convert this into an approximate discrete form as was done in Section . We write as an approximation to the integral in . The the element of the parameter set , the frequency and Em the input energy at the frequency . In this case , we see that is a matrix for each discrete parameter value . Hence , as in Section , we need a measure of the size of . Say we choose ,, then the robust optimal design becomes Obviously , there are many for the scalar function . One possible choice is This cost function is by the following observation : the scalar function E which that E is a concave function of E . Hence , becomes a standard concave maximization . This latter aspect is the subject of the journal version of this paper . This paper a robust optimal experiment design procedure . We have for a simple case , that a near optimal input is band limited noise . We have also an algorithm to design robust in more general and have showing the gains from the use of the algorithm with either the nominal optimal experiment , band limited white noise or band limited noise . ﻿ The characterization of ` compressible random is and extended to the case of stationary and ergodic . The main result of this work a check necessary and sufficient condition for a stationary and ergodic sequence to be ` compressible in the sense by Amini , and . Furthermore , for non ` compressible random , we provide a closed form expression for the best term relative approximation error given a rate of as the block length to infinity . of compressibility for a stochastic process , meaning that every realization can be well in some sense by its best term sparse version , been a topic of recent interest , , . compressibility for random can play an important role in regression , reconstruction for instance in the classical compressed analysis and reconstruction setting , Th . , inference and decision making . One important case is such a compressibility notion for i . i .. where the probability is with a density function . In this context , every realization of the process is clearly non sparse almost surely , and conventional ways of compressibility for finite dimensional , based on the power law decay of the best term approximation error or that belong to the weak ` ball , are not applicable either , as shown in , . by this , Amini al . and al . have recently new for compressible random . These are not based on the typical absolute approximation error decay pattern of the , but on a relative ` best term approximation error behavior . In particular , Amini al . formally define the concept of ` compressible process in Section below . This new definition a meaningful way of i . i .. random or in of the probability that almost all the ` relative energy of the process is concentrated in an arbitrarily small sub dimension of the innovation domain , as the block length to infinity . Under this umbrella , they provide two important the theory of order statistics . On the one hand , , Theorem that a concrete family of i . i .. is ` compressible the generalized , ‘ t and log logistic , while on the other side , , Theorem that with exponentially such as Generalized are not ` compressible . Therefore , it is interesting to ask about the compressibility of i . i . not considered in this analysis . In this direction , we highlight the work of al . , which under an alternative notion of relative ` compressibility almost sure convergence instead of convergence in measure criterion adopted in and a different analysis setting fixed rate instead of the variable rate used in , an exact dichotomy between compressible and non compressible i . i . Therefore , it is an interesting direction to connect Amini al . ` with the more refined almost sure convergence analysis of the ` best term relative approximation error in , Prop . , with the idea of the analysis of and . To address this question , as well as to extend the analysis to more general random , this work precisely all ` compressible random , in the sense of Amini al . , within the family of stationary and ergodic . Our main result Theorem a necessary and sufficient condition for an ergodic process to be ` compressible , for any arbitrary . Furthermore , for the case of non ` compressible ergodic , we provide a closed form expression for an achievable rate ` approximation error function . The key element in the proof is the application of the ergodic theorem and the derivation of intermediate almost sure convergence Lemma and in Section that match the approximation result by al . , Prop . for the i . i .. case . A corollary of Theorem a necessary and sufficient condition to categorize i . i .. random in of ` , which the analysis in and . For a finite dimensional vector x ,.., in , let , ,.. denote the ordered vector such that denote the ` norm of the best term approximation of , where by definition ` In addition , the best term ` approximation error of , in the sense that if is the collection of sparse , then , is the solution of minx `. For the analysis of infinite , Amini al . and al . the following relative best term ` distortion indicator : From this , Amini al . a notion of critical dimension for a finite length signal and a notion of ` for infinite . Definition : For and , , let us define , min ,.., :, . Let X ,.... be a random sequence with in , and by its consistent family of finite dimensional : , where X ,.., and the space of probability for the measurable space , . As a short hand , we denote by : the process distribution of . Let us define the measurable set An , where the last equality is by . Then in analogy with Definition , Amini al . the following : is the critical number of with which the set typical with respect to . With this , the process and , respectively is said to be ` compressible , if , , , We say that the rate distortion pair , is ` achievable for with probability , if there a sequence of positive such that and Definition : The rate distortion approximation function of , with probability is given by : In the next section , we will study the class of stationary and ergodic , where the best term approximation measured in of the function in will be in closed form . Furthermore , it will be shown for this class of random that Let be a stationary and ergodic sequence process with distribution : , where we denote by its shift invariant distribution . For simplicity , we assume that where de measure . Then is with a probability density function and . For a ,, we say that a measurable function : , , is integrable with respect THEOREM : Let be a stationary and ergodic process with marginal shift invariant distribution such that , and let us consider an arbitrary . Then we have the following dichotomy : If L : then is not ` compressible . Furthermore , if we introduce the induced probability measure in , by : Theorem a necessary and sufficient condition for a stationary and ergodic process to be ` compressible in the sense in Definition . In the case of non ` compressible , i . e ., when L , Theorem , what we call , the achievable rate distortion region for the process , given by the set of critical rate distortion : This region solely on the shift invariant measure and its induced measure in . In both i and , the critical rate for a stationary and ergodic is independent of . The justification is that asymptotically to infinity , the characterization of to compute on that belong to the tail field of the process , which is known to be trivial i . e ., their have zero or one probability for the case of ergodic . Therefore , we obtain almost sure convergence that make irrelevant the role of in the characterization of see Section A natural order among stationary and ergodic process can established from Theorem . Proposition : If is ` compressible for some , then is ` compressible for all . Proof : If L , then L for all . Proposition : If is not ` compressible for then is not ` compressible for all . Proof : If L , then L for all . For the emblematic i . i .. scenario , we want to highlight in more detail the by Amini al . related to ` compressibility in the sense of . , Theorem that if is such that for some , EX e then the i . i .. process is not ` compressible . On the other hand , , Theorem that if to the domain of attraction of a stable distribution , Chap . . with a , , then the process is ` compressible . First for , Theorem a refined result , revealing a indeed , the complete family of that are not ` compressible . In fact , in addition to that go to zero exponentially and consequently f L Gamma , heavy tail whose density are lower dominated by a power law decay of the form with for , student ‘ t freedom , are not ` compressible either . On the other hand , concerning , Th . , it is simple to verify that any that is in the domain of attraction of an a stable law with a that EX and consequently , part i of Theorem this family of ` compressible i . i . Corollary : Let be a stationary and ergodic process . If where EX e , then is not ` compressible for any . Corollary : Let be an ergodic process with invariant distribution and density , . If as for some , then . is compressible , if and only if ,. For the proof of Theorem , we derive almost sure convergence see Lemma and in Section . In the case when L : if is such that for some , it that , a ... In the case when , then limn , , a .. These are consistent and extend the result by al . , Prop . , which for the i . i .. case the same convergence limit for the object Their proof was based on the ‘ lemma of order statistics see in , Th . , while ours is based on the application of the ergodic theorem . then the latter also for all and for all , . Likewise , if for some , for some , and for all , the pair , is ` achievable for with probability , then all , with , and , are ` achievable for probability . Proof : Considering as a short hand , by definition in , where from it that . is lower dominated by , if there x and C such that for that then C . Let us first consider the case when L . For the rest , it is important to note that given that , then for all , there such that , and for all , there such that . For X ,.., , we can define : The second almost sure convergence is from the assumption that L . Then , we can state the following : In order to prove , let us fix , . Then there , such that and from Lemma if is such that , then limn , , a ... Let us consider an arbitrary such that , then again from Lemma , if a sequence is such that , then limn , , a ... Consequently ,, almost surely to a distortion strictly less than , and then for all : Hence from the definition of in , we have that eventually in , which that In general , the condition on for the rate i . e ., , such that and the distortion , The first inequality from Proposition and the last equality from the fact that the function is continuous as . To derive a lower bound , let us consider an arbitrary , . We know that there such that . Again from Lemma , for all such that On the other hand , from , we have that it is necessary that . This last inequality and are valid for any , , then and In other , that limn , a .. Furthermore , we have the following : eventually in . From this , for all , which the result from Proposition . The work of .. Silva is by of Grant and the Basal Grant . The work of .. is by Grant , and internal research grant such that for some . Let us take an arbitrary At . From the zero rate assumption on and the definition of At , such that , which that Therefore considering that , Doing the same process for the collection , we have that , Then from the sigma additivity , which the result in . with this result , for an arbitrary , let us consider such that limn . We know that there to such that , and for this to we consider and as defined in . Then for any it that Furthermore , from definition of the ordered sequence , it is simple to verify that see . : if we consider , from , and the fact that , is o in the last equality in from definition of in . Finally from and , let be such that . Let us consider an where and consequently and are mutually absolutely continuous . Again for this , we use the in , where for all , it that such that . The first equality from the continuity of the function with respect to . Then from the fact that , we have that , , , a .. Finally , proving that , a .. an equivalent symmetric argument and we omit it . Proof : For let us consider , and , such that and such that . Considering the and that At from and . Let us fix an arbitrary At . Considering that , then eventually in , and therefore eventually , which from definition of that limn , . The fact the event surely the result . ﻿ This paper discrete time control subject to average data rate . We focus on a situation where a noisy linear system been designed assuming transparent feedback and , due to implementation , a source scheme with unity signal transfer function to be in the feedback path . For this situation , and by on a class of source built around entropy , we develop a framework to deal with average data rate in a tractable manner that from both information and control . As an illustration of the of our framework , we apply it to study the interplay between stability and average data in the considered architecture . It is shown that the class of can achieve mean square stability at average data that are , at most , . per sample away from the absolute minimum rate for stability established by and . This rate penalty is by the simplicity of our approach . Index Average data rate , control , perfect reconstruction , signal to noise ratio . control often use nontransparent communication links and , thus , communication arise . Such include random , data loss and data rate quantization , , and . This paper on average data rate . It might be that the communication capacity of modern is in general sufficiently large , so as to make quantization irrelevant see , e .., and . However , there exist where the communication assigned to a particular relevant control signal are limited and , hence , quantization effects become important . Quantization is a highly nonlinear operation on and , accordingly , it is hard to analyze . In control theory , quantization usually been as an undesirable effect that should be for see , e .., . This in contrast to the by information theory , where quantization is considered as an integral part of see , e .., and . This line of reasoning recently been brought to the control arena see , e .., , , , , and . An alternative view of quantization , to , also been inside the control community ; see , e .., , , , and . In a discrete time control framework , a key problem is being able to characterize the minimal average data rate in , e .., per sample that one to achieve a given control objective . In the context of noiseless digital , i . e ., that transmit data without or at a constrained rate , this question is related to rate distortion theory i . e ., source ; see , e .., , , , and . The associated design problem is how to quantize a signal , with the average data rate , whilst a degree of fidelity or performance . A typical performance measure is the mean square error , but other are also possible . For instance , discrete to address black and white control such as , e .., and observability . Standard in information theory and in particular in rate distortion theory rely upon arbitrarily long which incur arbitrarily long time . In addition , most of the general on rate distortion theory do not take stability nor causality into account , . It , thus , becomes clear that standard rate distortion theory is not useful to deal with control . Some progress been made in the information theory community towards a causal rate distortion theory , but most use that , even though causal , allow for arbitrary , . Only recently , established upper on the zero delay causal rate distortion function for stationary . However , the best provided in are of algorithmic nature , and derived for open loop . Thus , stability are not in . This is also the case of the in , where sequential quantization of is . The discussion in the previous paragraph the work in , , and specially relevant , even though the focus in those works only on stability . The first that pointed out that there a data rate under which memoryless control cannot keep the state of a noiseless plant bounded were in and . The were later extended in and and with memory , and adaptive scaling so and . A landmark result was in , where the focus on noisy plant subject to mild on the noise statistics . It was shown in that it is possible to find causal , and such that the resulting closed loop system is mean square stable if and only if the average data rate in per sample , say , where the th unstable plant pole . The above result a fundamental limitation in control closed over digital , when the problem of interest is mean square stabilization . similar to arise as to different e .., observability , deterministic stability and under different on the and see , e .., , , , , and . Indeed , the quantity on the right hand side of is a fundamental measure of the difficulty of a system , as in and . All known to date that achieve stability at average data arbitrarily close to use complex nonlinear time that , in principle , have infinite memory . The consideration of with limited or no memory is much more involved and no explicit are currently available see , also , , Section . An alternative simpler approach been in , although for the scalar plant case only . Almost all the work to above on stability only . A performance approach been in and . In that work , for separation and certainty equivalence have been in the context of quadratic stochastic for fully with data rate in the feedback path . If the a specific recursive structure , then certainty equivalence and a quasi separation principle hold . This result is interesting , but does not give a computable characterization of the optimal . A similar drawback is by the in . In that work , performance related are expressed in of the so sequential rate distortion function a rate distortion function with causality , which is difficult to compute in general . For fully first order , an expression for the sequential rate distortion function . However , it is not clear from the in whether or not the sequential rate distortion function is tight see , Section . Related work can be found in , where estimation are . The main contribution of this paper is a novel , though restricted , bridge between information theory and control theory . The link is restricted it for a specific class of based on entropy see , e .., , , and . Nevertheless , the link is useful , one to address control system design subject to average data rate in a systematic manner . Our approach is constructive and based upon standard building . As such , it on average data that are to be achievable with conceptually simple . An additional feature of our approach is that it does not rely on asymptotic e ., high rate or high vector . As both a motivation for our approach , and also to illustrate a , we linear system been designed assuming transparent feedback and , due , a source unity signal transfer function to be in the feedback path . For this situation , we discuss how to obtain on the minimal average data rate that one to attain a certain performance level , and also provide a detailed characterization of the interplay between stability and average data . It is shown that the class of can achieve mean square stability at average data that are to be at most . per sample away from the absolute minimum in . This rate penalty is by the simplicity of our approach . A key result in the paper is that , when the class of source is employed , average data rate can be enforced by imposing signal to noise ratio in a related additive noise channel see , also , and . Our , thus , establish a formal relationship between and average data in noiseless digital . As such , our work goes beyond and where no such relationship is . Early of the in this paper can be found in and . The remainder of the paper is organized as . Section notation . Section the setup considered in the paper . Section a lower bound on average that the remainder of the paper . class of source considered in the paper and average data rate to . Section on the interplay between stability and average data rate . Section . For ease of reference , the Appendix basic information theoretic . the strictly positive , and the non negative , respectively . the magnitude of the complex scalar the conjugate transpose of the matrix is the set of all strictly proper and stable real rational transfer , and is the set of all stable , and minimum phase real rational transfer . The usual norm in is written . If is an asymptotically wide sense stationary process , then denote its stationary variance , its stationary power spectral density , and the corresponding spectral factor , respectively . If is a discrete time signal , then is the th sample , and is shorthand for . times , as usual . We write if and only if and are independent . We write , and form a chain see Appendix . and stand for the expectation and probability of , respectively . Definition of information theoretic and related notation is given in Appendix . This paper on the of Fig . , where is a given linear time invariant system such that exogenous , is a signal related to closed loop performance , is a signal available for measurement , and is a control input . We assume that been designed so as to achieve satisfactory performance when . The feedback path , however , an error free digital channel . Hence , the quantization of the signal becomes mandatory . This task is by an that the sequence of binary . Once these are available at the end , a the signal that is fed back to . The situation above naturally if , for example , to the interconnection of an plant and an controller that been designed without taking into account data rate in the feedback path . a is a proper real rational transfer function , single input single output and strictly proper , The initial state of , say , is a second order random variable , and is a second order process with spectral factor . Assuming that the loop is stable when is consistent with our setup where been designed supposing transparent feedback . Assuming to be strictly proper the well of the of Fig . for all causal between and . This assumption can be removed at the expense of additional care . However , removing the constraint of being single input single output , additional effort The remainder of this paper at building a framework to study the interplay between the average rate at which the channel are , and the performance and stability of the of Fig . . To that end , we begin by first a general lower bound on average data in feedback . The use of digital communication the of . separation theorem that this process can be into two : source and channel see , also , . Source with the representation of continuous a countable alphabet and , as such , quantization . On the other hand , channel on the reliable and efficient communication of digital data over an underlying channel . We note that separation , and is useful , for point to point where causality and are not an issue . If causality are , then separation does not hold in general see , also , . Nonetheless , the study of causal source in isolation a key open problem in information theory , , . The study of optimal source or quantization is the subject of rate distortion theory . Rate distortion theory does not take channel into account , and an digital link between the sending and , . In this paper , we adopt a purely source perspective and consider source whose output have a variable instantaneous length , but a bounded average length see , also , . We note , however , that bounded average data does not guarantee bounded instantaneous data , . for this to happen are in . Without loss of generality , we consider source with the structure in Fig . . In that figure , is a , a reproduction , and the and form a lossless pair also entropy coder entropy pair ; see , e .., , Chapter . The continuously valued random into a countable set of . These are then by the into a countable set of prefix free binary that , in general , at every time instant . At the end , the the output from the binary by the , and the reproduction the back into real . A precise characterization of and is provided below . In this paper we focus on single input single output within feedback , as in Fig . . Accordingly , we consider , reproduction and that are causal and , moreover , operate on a sample by sample basis , without delay . We also assume that side information is available at both the and sides . The new side information that becomes available at time instant is by , for the source , and by for the source . Such side information is in suitably defined and , where and . We also define the set information that becomes available at both the and sides at instant . In Fig . , the dynamic system is assumed to be such that its scalar output where is a possibly time deterministic , is the initial state of , is the scalar input , and , with , is an exogenous random process . We also characterize the output of the via is a possibly time deterministic , and is a fixed countable set . The are then used by the to construct the binary via is a time deterministic , and is a countable set of prefix free binary . The output of the is to the end assuming ideal digital communication consistent with the source point of view adopted in this paper . Once becomes available at the end , the via for any . Condition the fact that the considered here operate in real time , without delay . Finally , the reproduction its output via Before the reception of are available at the side . It , thus , that the length , measured in , of any binary description of the output symbol see , Chapter , , and where conditional entropy see Appendix . The gap between both sides of on how efficient the is at . It is known that there exist such that That is , the gap in is smaller than bit when suitable are employed e .., Definition . : The average data rate of the source via We will now study a lower bound on that only on the joint statistics of the source input and its output . Assumption . : The and in Fig . are causal , by , and such that . Assumption . can be thought as being a fairness assumption . Indeed , the that the source only past and present , and side information not related to the message being sent , to construct the current output value . In other , we assume that the channel is the only link from to . Definition . : The source scheme by is said to have an invertible reproduction in short , an invertible there a deterministic such that . If a source scheme an invertible , then knowledge of is equivalent to knowledge of . The generality of source with invertible is next . Lemma . : Consider any source scheme by . Define . If and the corresponding is not invertible , then there another causal source , where is the conditional probability of the most likely symbol of the alphabet of , given . Proof : Assume that the such that it been possible to use to recover from , for all such assumption is not at time instant . If at time instant cannot be inverted by the conditional probability of the output of being at time instant , given . Consider now another pair that like , except for the fact that instead of either or at time instant . At time instant , the value with conditional probability , given . Thus from the definition of and that of entropy , from inequality , and from the definition of and that of . By the above procedure until there are no two of that are into the same value at time instant , one a source scheme where knowing is equivalent to knowing and Given , it from Lemma . that one can always focus on source with invertible , Lemma . : Consider a source scheme inside a feedback loop , as in Fig . . If Assumption . and the is invertible , then the chain and , conditioned upon true . Proof : Given , it from that there a deterministic such that . Since , it immediately that and are independent upon knowledge of , thus proving our first claim . The second claim is immediate upon that upon . Theorem . : Consider a source scheme inside a feedback loop , as in Fig . . If Assumption . and the is invertible , then . where from Property in Appendix and the fact that , from the fact that the is invertible , from , the fact that the is invertible , and the second claim of Lemma . , and from and the first claim of Lemma . . The result now . Theorem . that , when causality are , directed mutual information rate across a source scheme as a lower bound on the associated average . The result a physical quantity average data rate to an information theoretic quantity directed mutual information rate . Theorem . also that the appropriate information theoretic definition of average data in causal is the directed mutual information rate . However , showing that the , over all joint input and output that satisfy a causality constraint , of the directed mutual information rate across a source scheme an tight lower bound on the corresponding average data rate , remains an open problem see , also , . To our knowledge , Theorem . , for the first time , a characterization of the relationship between directed mutual information rate and the operational rate of source within feedback . The result in the literature that is to Theorem . is , Theorem . However , that result is derived for entropy only see Section , as opposed to the general causal source considered here . Related are , Lemma . . and , Theorem . . where feedback data are . However , those do not focus on operational data , and assume no feedback between the at the physical of the . Other relevant and related works are and . In , the study fundamental directed mutual information across within feedback , and Bode like fundamental that arise due to finite capacity communication see , also , . On the other hand , a relationship between operational data and directed mutual information rate from a channel perspective . In that work , the show that the , over all joint channel input and output that satisfy a causality constraint , of the directed mutual information rate across a channel capacity with feedback for that channel . Despite all the work to above , no relationship besides that of Theorem . between average operational data and directed mutual information rate from a source perspective , and valid in general , is currently available in the literature . This paper at a bridge between control and information , when a specific class of source is employed . This section such class . In order to obtain a simple yet useful framework for the study of the of Fig . , we will focus on the following class of source . Definition . : A source scheme is said to be independent Assumption . , its reproduction is invertible , and the or quantization noise sequence , defined via , where is a second order zero mean i . i .. sequence , finite differential entropy and the a deterministic initial state ; see Fig . a . The class of independent source is restrictive . However , it is a sensible choice when data rate arise in that have already been designed to perform satisfactorily in the absence of quantization . In such , which include the situation of interest in this paper see Section , it is desirable to introduce quantization effects in an additive fashion so as not to alter the nominal design see , also , . We will describe a practical independent source scheme in Section . We begin our study of independent source by that the following . Lemma . : Any independent source scheme can be written as shown in Fig . , where and are auxiliary , is as in Definition . , and . To prove our second claim , we note that the on and imply that there exist deterministic , with and invertible , such that see Since Lemma . , the system that when an independent source scheme is employed in the feedback loop of Fig . can be written as shown in Fig . . Note that the error free digital channel of Fig . is in the independent source scheme of Fig . . In Section , we will A key feature of independent source is that the directed mutual information rate across them can be bounded by the directed mutual information rate that would arise if all random were by . To be precise , we introduce the following definition . Definition . : Consider an system with random and random initial state . If is a state , input , or output variable of the system , then to the signal that would arise in the place of , when all and initial are by jointly random or the same first and second order cross , and the same statistical dependence , as in the original situation ; is the counterpart of . Lemma . : Consider the of Fig . , where the scheme is independent . If Assumption . , then where and are the auxiliary in Fig . see Lemma . , entropy rate , and relative entropy see Appendix . in hold and are . Remark . : If the of Lemma . hold and , in addition , is jointly , then see , Chapter and The relevance of Lemma . in that the characterization of directed mutual information rate under is straightforward . Theorem . : Consider the of Fig . , where the scheme is independent . If Assumption . , then Theorem . explicit upper on the directed mutual information rate across any independent source scheme in a stable and causal feedback loop . These are , essentially , expressed in of the spectral of the auxiliary and in the scheme of Fig . . Interestingly enough , there a one to one correspondence between the of an independent source scheme , and upper on the directed mutual information rate across it . Given Theorem . , we can infer that there a link between the of an independent source scheme and the associated average data rate . A precise characterization of such link will be given in Section . We note that also a relationship between directed mutual information rate and Bode like , when . , Theorem . to feedback with arbitrary disturbance and initial state . Indeed , , Theorem . can be from the inequality in upon assuming to be jointly distributed . We end this section by showing that , for any given independent source scheme , there another independent source scheme , with the same noise color and the same directed mutual information rate across it , such that the gap between the right hand side of and can be made arbitrarily small . Theorem . : Consider the of Fig . , where the source scheme is independent and a fixed noise source . Suppose that Assumption . and define Since and , we have from the Bode integral Theorem and the definition of that . Proceeding as in , proof of Lemma ,. , we conclude that the last term in can be made arbitrarily small with . Our last claim now from the last claim of Theorem . . If for some , then is not admissible since it and , thus , the representation of the independent source scheme of Fig . would be internally unstable . Entropy are that have convenient that make them suitable for use as building when dealing with average data rate , , and . In particular , we show below that can be used to construct the noise source that an independent source scheme . The structure of an is shown in Fig . . In that figure , is a dither signal which is assumed available at both the sending and , the pair is as in where is the quantization step a designer choice . The output of the quantization noise as an independent i . i .. source is common in the signal literature . In general , this model is not exact , but becomes exact in when the dither is appropriately chosen see , e .., and . The next theorem that this key property remains valid when are in strictly causal feedback . Theorem . : Consider the setup of Fig . , where the is as above and a finite quantization step . Assume that is a proper real rational transfer function , that the open loop transfer function from to is single input and strictly proper , that the closed loop system is internally stable and well when , that the signal is a second order process , and that the initial state of , say , is a second order random variable . If is such that , then Proof : Similar to the proof of Theorem in see , Chapter for . Remark . : The definition of and that Theorem . irrespective of how the pair is chosen . In particular , it if the pair is ; see . It is also worth that , if the dither is not at the side , then only moment independence is . For the remainder of the paper , the following consequence of Theorem . is relevant . Corollary . : Consider the system of Fig . with and as in Lemma . . If an , with dither chosen as in Theorem . and finite quantization step , is used as the link from to , then the system of Fig . becomes an independent scheme . Fig . . Explicit of an independent source scheme that an as the link between and . Proof : Given Lemma . and Theorem . , it to show that the resulting source scheme Assumption . and an invertible . Since in the present situation , Assumption . is satisfied . Also , since , its initial state is deterministic and , by definition of , and , we conclude that knowledge of is equivalent to knowledge of . The invertibility of When an is used as the link between and in the system of Fig . , the resulting scheme can be as in Fig . . Fig . . From that figure , it is clear that feedback from to the input of in Fig . does not require explicit feedback around the digital channel . Recall that we Remark . : , and share a common source of randomness the dither . In principle , this that both the and must share information about the dither . This an additional degree of implementation complexity , but to the best of our knowledge , there is no other simple way of satisfying Assumption . . In practice , one can use synchronized number with the same . Average Data in Independent Source That Use : We are now in a position to present an upper bound on the average data rate in independent source that use . We start with the following result . Theorem . : Consider the of Fig . , where the source scheme is independent . Suppose that Assumption . , and that the link between the auxiliary and see Fig . and Lemma . is an with dither chosen as in Theorem . and finite quantization step . Then , and there an . Also , from Theorem . and its proof we have that and . the above , our first claim from the proof of Theorem in . The second claim from the first , and . A direct proof can be by the definition of , and the fact that knowledge of is equivalent to knowledge of see proof of Corollary . , to show Theorem . that inside independent source one to achieve average data that are close to the absolute lower established in Theorem . . The worst case gap , which in the inefficiency of the and is smaller than , is intrinsic to any scalar lossless coder and cannot be removed , unless one high rate regime ; , block entropy which may introduce unbounded ; , , or the scheme to operate in a nonstationary fashion by time , . In practice the gap may be smaller than ,. , . Corollary . : Consider the setup and of Theorem . . There an such that Remark . : Theorem . and Corollary . are only existence type . The implementation of inside outside the scope of this paper , and we refer the reader to , Remark . for related . Corollary . a closed form upper bound on the average data rate in an independent source scheme that an . The bound is given in of spectral of the output , and two additional constant . The second term in , i . e ., per sample i . e ., per sample , to the divergence of the quantization noise distribution from and because generate uniform quantization noise not noise ; see , also , . This term can also be given an alternative interpretation in of the space filling loss when a finite dimensional instead of an infinite dimensional one , with spherical quantization . We refer the interested reader to , , and for further . As before , the term bit due to the inefficiency of the inside the . Interestingly , our result without on the external signal nor on the initial state . Remark . : If the of Corollary . hold and , in addition , is , then a lower bound for in is given by the first term on the right hand side of . That is , becomes tight up to per sample see Remark . and Theorem . . Independent Source With Memoryless : So far , we have considered where the pair is to exploit all past and present , binary , and side information . Such have unrestricted memory and its implementation the knowledge of the conditional distribution of , given . That distribution can be difficult to characterize . In order to simplify implementation , it is common to consider without memory see , also , . Definition . : An is said to be memoryless the associated pair is such that When a memoryless , the can only exploit the knowledge of to encode . Thus , must be by . Again , it is possible to design such that compare with We now present a definition and two that allow one to state the counterpart of Corollary . for the case of independent source that use memoryless . Theorem . : Consider the setup and of Theorem . . If the is memoryless , then and there an pair such that Theorem . : Consider the of Fig . , where the scheme is independent . If Assumption . , then Proof : The result proceeding as in the proof of Theorem . see in . Corollary . : Consider the setup and of Theorem . . There a memoryless such that Remark . : In analogy to Remark . , we note that if the of Corollary . hold , and is , then The inside a memoryless less information to encode than the inside an with unrestricted memory . As a consequence , average data achievable with memoryless will be , in general , than those achievable with that have unrestricted memory . This . and . , as inequality . However , the conclusion is pessimistic when are used inside independent source . In this case , Theorem . that the rate penalty , as measured by the gap between the right hand sides of and , when a memoryless instead of an with memory , can be made arbitrarily small if an appropriate choice for the auxiliary and is made . Hence , without being unduly conservative , it to study the to give upper on the average data rate of independent source , irrespective of whether they use with unrestricted memory or not . Consider the of Fig . when the source scheme is independent and an as the link between the auxiliary and see Fig . . For this setup , the of A one to restate control average data rate as control stationary . This one to design subject to average data rate in a systematic fashion that standard quadratic optimization . For instance , if performance is measured by of the stationary variance of the error signal , then , irrespective of whether the unrestricted memory or not , the minimal average data rate to achieve a performance level , say , see . and . , and that guarantee stability in an appropriate sense , and is the minimal stationary of the source coder that one to achieve the performance level , i . e ., Once is which , in principle , is a standard quadratic control problem , one readily a bound on see , also , Section . The framework provided here is conservative since it is based on that are not tight in general . However , the framework that are , by construction , to be achievable with conceptually simple building , and do not rely on any asymptotic approximation . As above , the framework also the door to use standard synthesis to deal with average data rate in control system design , as in . These are the main that distinguish our approach from the literature in Section I . We now illustrate the approach outlined in on the minimal average data rate for stability , i . e ., we consider in . The case of finite is due to space see . We start by the interplay between on the source coder and stability . By virtue of Theorem . , we focus on the feedback system of Fig . , and use the following notion of stability where , is the system state at time instant where is a second order random variable , and are constant matrices of appropriate , and is a second order process . The system is said to be mean square stable there exist finite and a finite and positive semi definite both not depending on , such that small with a sufficiently large and cannot be made equal to zero since , by assumption ,. Well known , Lemma ,. allow one to conclude that there such that the gap in is arbitrarily small . The result , thus The existence of the family also by the in . Theorem . that , for independent source , the minimal that is compatible with , i . e . is only a function of the unstable of . Hence , for any given , the condition is necessary and sufficient to be able to find , and a noise variance equivalently , a quantization step such that the resulting is and the . Corollary . : Consider the setup and of Theorem . . If , then the stationary variance of the error signal unbounded . We see from Corollary . that the study of on for are insufficient to give performance . This fact is unsurprising , and consistent with in and . We now return to the of Fig . when the source scheme is independent and an . Given the definition of an independent source scheme , it that the notion of in Definition . is still valid in this setting . It is also clear that , provided Assumption . , Corollary . : Consider the setup and of Theorem . . Then , irrespective of whether the memory or not , the following . a The minimal average data rate compatible with , i . e ., as defined in , a Consider the case of with unrestricted memory . Equation and Theorem . yield The upper bound in upon Theorem . in . The lower bound from , Theorem . . Corollary . lower and upper on the minimal average data rate that is compatible with in the considered , when an independent source scheme is employed . A feature of our proposal is that with unrestricted memory do not provide any advantage over memoryless at least from a point of view ; see , also , discussion at the end of Section . This is relevant in practice since the implementation of with unrestricted memory is prohibitive . Indeed , in order to design an independent scheme that stability at an average data rate smaller than , it to use a memoryless with sufficiently large quantization step , an pair designed , and and that , for the situation studied in Section A , guarantee at sufficiently close to . By doing so , however , the performance of the will be see Corollary . . This is consistent with in and . The of Corollary . show that , when an independent source scheme is employed in the of Fig . , can be at average data that are to be no than the absolute bound in and plus per sample . This extra rate is , in our view , a fair price to be if one oneself to the conceptually simple source considered in this paper . We note however that the upper bound in is a worst case upper bound . As , in practice one can expect to achieve at no than see and . Our can also be used to provide upper on the average data rate that is to achieve , when memoryless source are employed in the considered , then the resulting source scheme no memory and it is easy to show that and the pair can be chosen so as to achieve at an average data rate satisfying Relation can be with the of , Section even though on a different notion of stability . That work that there exist memoryless that guarantee stability with bounded but otherwise unknown data , whist a computable upper bound on the minimal average data rate compatible with . is designed assuming transparent feedback and , at a later design stage , a unity signal transfer function source scheme is tobe rate feedback path have on closed loop performance . To address this problem , we have on a class of source and , by doing so , we have established a bridge between information and control . A key result of our work is that , for the considered class of , average data rate can be enforced by imposing signal to noise ratio in a related additive noise communication channel . As an application of our , we studied the interplay between average data in the considered setup . For that problem , the class of was shown to achieve mean square stability at average data that are to be less than . per sample above the absolute minimum established in . We refer the reader to and for of the framework in this paper to beyond stabilization . A key open problem not in this work is how to incorporate average data rate into control causal but otherwise unrestricted source . The following and are standard and can be found in . Unless otherwise stated , all are assumed to be random with well defined joint probability density or mass . The of is . to the conditional of , given . mean with respect to ; If and are discrete , then we use to denote the conditional entropy of given . The are analogue to the continuous case . Conditional mutual information between discrete is defined as in the continuous case . The relative entropy between and or divergence of the distribution of with respect to that of is defined via . Given joint If is the counterpart of see Definition . , then . If , are the of then The entropy rate of a stochastic process is defined via . A useful fact is the following then equality , in addition , is asymptotically ; see , Lemma . . ﻿ In this paper we review the previously for successive compute and forward and discuss about their incompleteness through some . Then we present a comprehensive formulation for step successive interference cancellation problem through the asymmetric successive forward strategy . It is shown that the generalized formulation the previous . Interference management in relay is one of the most important in wireless . Among the various for relay forward , compress and forward , amplify and forward , and compute and forward see and therein , the later one interesting attention for the problem of interference in noisy relay , especially when it is more helpful to decode linear of rather than individually them . In , several have been for integer non integer linear of in the with equal unequal power , and with symmetric asymmetric channel gains . In , a compute and forward strategy been for relay with equal power and asymmetric channel gains based on lattice . The receiver given sufficiently many linear , can decode integer linear of and solve for its desired . To obtain higher , can recover those linear which are closer to the channel fading . This strategy simultaneously protection against noise and the opportunity to exploit interference for gains . On the other hand , in , a scheme been for relay with unequal power and symmetric channel gains based on lattice and compute an achievable cast rate within a constant gap to the capacity . There is one point here : in , the assumed equal power and stated that unequal power can be incorporated by scaling the channel appropriately . Here with an example we show that , when one does this , the of a smaller rate region than that found in . In successive strategy been for the relay network with the same assumption as in . In this method after a linear combination of , the receiver can combine it with its channel observation to obtain a new effective channel which is better for the next targeted linear combination . In an asymmetric been for with unequal power and asymmetric channel gains based on lattice . In , relay with unequal power and asymmetric channel gains been considered as a special case of the model in . They also consider successful recovery of the individual at the final destination in addition to the relay recovery . In and a asymmetric been . This method scaling to decode integer linear of . The use of scaling in fact is equivalent to non integer linear of lattice and it different to have different , so by appropriately those , different on the boundary of the rate region can be . Also , in the idea of non integer linear of lattice been . Their method can be considered as a special case of the of and as well . In this correspondence we first give a brief review of the previous works about . Moreover we discuss about their incompleteness of some through some . Then we present our generalized formulation for the successive interference cancellation problem in asymmetric relay through the asymmetric successive forward strategy . More specifically , we extend the method of to step and also we take advantage of scaling to reach to a comprehensive formulation for the asymmetric strategy . It is shown that the generalized formulation the previous . The paper is organized as : In Section the system model is defined . In Section the of are and . In Section our main , the extended asymmetric successive compute approach for general relay is . Some concluding are provided in Section set of the real up to the nearest integer value . are shown with . In this paper we consider a real relay network . It is the same network as been used in , but here we consider the assumption of unequal power and asymmetric channel gains . Each relay in the network , indexed by ;, a noisy linear combination of the through where are the channel gains and is i . i .. noise , , In . Let denote the vector of channel gains from the relay . For all , each channel input length sequence subject to the average power constraint , i . e . The channel gains are assumed to be known and constant . In this document we only consider communication between the transmitter and the . In this section we review and compare the works of , and discuss about their . In and , achievable rate have been for real valued based on the successive compute and forward strategy . The combination of those is in the following theorem . Theorem . For the defined system model with equal equation gain am , , where non zero am am , , with ;, the following computation are achievable As in , the interpretation of is that the relay can first target a linear combination , am , that is easy to decode and then use it to create a better effective channel for the second linear combination In , a class of real with one receiver power P and symmetric channel gains been considered . Channel gains have been assumed to be one . An achievable rate region been based on the compute and forward strategy . It is in the following theorem , is achievable for user , with bounded error probability which goes to zero infinity . In equal power have been to the in the network . It been declared in that in the case of unequal power , channel gains can be scaled in order to get equal power . Next by the aid of two , we show that the that can be by the method of with the scaling of channel gains are smaller than those by the method of . Example : Consider a network with , , unequal power constraint P P , and channel gains h h . Theorem the following achievable rate for : If we do channel gain scaling as , we get to equal power constraint P for both . Substituting these along with a which is than , e .., assume i in , then from the assumption P P , it is that . With another example , we show that the rate region of with equal power and asymmetric channel gains , is smaller than the one from by scaling the power accordingly while leaving unit channel gains . Example : Consider a network with , , P P , and h h . Substituting them in Theorem along with a , If we do scaling in order to obtain symmetric channel gains equal to , the scaled power will be P h and P h . With this , Theorem the following rate for user i , since h h h subject to h h . So as before , it is seen that in a higher rate R in comparison with Thus , the method of , scaling channel gains with power , smaller rate region than that in in the case of unequal power . In and , an asymmetric compute and forward is which the problem by appropriately fine and course for each user . Also in , by the aid of scaling , the equation been which can reach to the rate of for the case of unequal power . In a network been considered which a receiver with which an dimensional channel , the channel gain between th transmitter and the receiver , is i . i .. white noise with distribution , , to the power constraint . Let h and P . The theorem is as , Theorem . For the defined system model and equation coefficient am , with ; where am am , the following computation rate is vector of power of the as P , P . In Section we state the extension of to step asymmetric successive compute and forward by the same method as used in and also we consider scaling as done in and . In and by real scaling and the resulting non integer linear combination of , one additional flexibility for the individual message of different . Corresponding of interest from and can be summed up in the following theorem , Theorem . Let real . For the defined system model in Section with equal power equation coefficient am , where am am , the computation rate is achievable if The main idea behind this result on the observation that the lattice do not have to lie in the lattice which is used for at the . As an example in , the two way relay channel been considered where two have unequal power P and P and the channel gain vector to the relay is unity . The relay power constraint . All are with unit variance . They obtain the following achievable rate region for the , where the relay is assumed to decode a linear combination of user of the form where , , , and for all in . As it is seen , the previously problem for unequal power is here by the aid of , but it is not obviously a straightforward substitution of channel vector and in the equation of the rate region . In the next section we propose a straightforward formulation which this problem . In , the step successive interference cancellation strategy been for more than one linear combination of in multiple access . The method is based on the matrix algebra consider general equation gain which is different from the method of which is based on successive interference cancellation and consider orthogonal equation gain . In a network with relay and been considered . They used the idea the non integer linear combination of instead of scaling and they have critical on the rate region where the rate of one user the cut set bound . For the method of is actually a special case of and by considering . In this section we propose a straightforward and comprehensive equation for step asymmetric successive compute and forward strategy . We assume unequal power and asymmetric channel gains . Our main result for step asymmetric successive compute and forward strategy is in the following theorem : Theorem . For the system model with unequal power constraint P , consider non zero equation coefficient ami , where ami ami , ami , and i ;, and let real . The computation rate R is achievable where Corollary . For , i . e ., single step of integer linear combination of , the rate of Remark : One can see that by scaling channel gains with power , i . e ., substituting with , and also substituting with in , is . But in spite of the formal equivalence of and in the case of unequal power , there is a difference between the conceptual basis of these . As in the proof of Theorem in Appendix , in the strategy of , the of different have equal independent of what the of are , but in the strategy of , the transmit their own real power . Corollary . For , i . e ., step interference cancelation , the rate of to Remark : Equal power and asymmetric channel By considering equal power P P , to , and also by considering for all , and am , Remark : Unequal power and symmetric channel Assume for all , and a I , then . As it is seen from the above , our formulation is capable of both unequal power and asymmetric channel without the aid of scaling . In the following corollary we obtain a more reduced form for and when and , e .., the network with one relay and less than three . Corollary . For the network with , , the rate of Theorem for step successive interference cancelation , i . e . Remark : For , P P , i . e ., equal power , a a , a and a b , b , and to , . In this paper we studied the asymmetric step successive compute and forward scheme for interference management in relay with unequal power and asymmetric channel gains . We first the previous for this scheme and about their through some . Then we a comprehensive formulation for asymmetric successive compute and forward scheme by taking advantage of all the of the previous works together . It is shown that the approach the previously . Proof : Let ,..., which are simultaneously good and the lattice among them . The equivalent noise variance at the , which will be defined later in the proof , determine the order of this lattice chain . noise variance to a lattice . Additionally , are such that which are simultaneously good with second , where is a positive number . At each transmitter , the is , where the region of , and the number of the relay which in lower achievable among the which should decode the message of transmitter . The transmitter , where is a random vector uniformly distributed in which is as a dither . is independent uniformly distributed in , so it average all The receiver to retrieve from ym instead of , for all . Note that there is a one to one between , so is equivalent to . For , the receiver consider lattice which the lattice point ym in in which , i . e ., so the lattice of transmitter , is successful following relation , for all , where the variance of the effective noise m and it is as : In the following , we obtain the for the successive of other possible integer of . To decode the integer sum with coefficient vector ami , where i ;, the relay the projection of onto ym from ym as : At last the relay the linear combination with coefficient vector ami by By the same as shown in and substituting with with , and am with ami , it can be shown that the following rate is achievable for all First we introduce the following lemma which will be used in the proof of Corollary . Lemma . The following identity is satisfied for arbitrary dimensional real a a , a an , b , b and c , c , with . By substituting the of the a ,, the right hand side of , we have . So the total number of in the first and second line of are n n n which is equal to and is zero for . is n , the number of in i i is n n when i is not satisfied , so the number of in is n n n which is equal to zero for . Proof : We must show that and to . It is easy to see that is exactly the same as the first term of . Now we simplify to obtain the second term of ﻿ We present empirical on the achievable gains stemming from the use of wireless remote radio in a typical urban environment . Our work is based on simultaneous path loss of the base station and links to outdoor street level . We statistically characterize the increase in received power , when a is added to improve the coverage by a base station . We consider diverse coverage for the mobile terminal , the effect of position with respect to the intended . We also compare the power gains that would be in practice from combining the from the base with those of the , such as selection combining and maximum ratio combining . We conclude that under practical , the of will depend very strongly on the existence of line of sight links between the and the intended . For at low , below the clutter , only in a street canyon position with respect to the will obtain a benet . Our data also that the gains in noise ratio when maximum ratio combining are only marginally better than those of the much simpler selection combining . One of the great for today wireless communication is to provide adequate spatial coverage in a cost effective way , while and interference adequate for high frequency re use . To meet this challenge , during the last few there been a growing interest in the study of , relay and low complexity , . These may constitute relatively simple , low cost and easy to install when to the deployment of an additional base station to serve mobile within the cell . While are around a small coverage base station with low transmit power connected to a wired network , a is connected to a through a wireless link , being able to repeat or re code the data by amplify or decode and forward , among . A repeater may be thought of as an amplify and forward relay with no or ability . In this context , there are two basic of : wireless , and remote radio , also known as ber , connected to a by an optical ber . will suffer large and small scale fading at both and links . In contrast , for wireless , achievable gains will only depend on the quality of the connection , which it an attractive solution to provide connectivity to wireless in dense urban , where the links to the may experience shadowing and ber connectivity for the may be readily available . Proper placement of a is obviously a fundamental factor in the compromise between the desired gains and the cost associated with its installation . In this regard , in an urban environment it is reasonable to expect that while coverage will improve with antenna height , this will at the same time have a negative impact on deployment and on channel interference , thus affecting frequency reuse in a large system , . If the is to cover an area of a size comparable to a small cell , then it is reasonable to assume that this is best by its antenna in normally used by base i . e above the clutter height . In such well established propagation such as those of and al . will be adequate to predict the coverage by the . Alternatively , they may be positioned at lower with the aim of in more limited , i . e . generating within a large cell . Coverage in growing interest as it can provide local in signal to noise ratio and thus higher data , . This may be without generating excessive interference in neighboring and at lower implementation when to a base station , , , particularly when below the surrounding clutter height . Numerous empirical have been for the statistical characterization of path loss in relatively radio links . Analytical based on optical geometry have also been for in urban , . Goldsmith al . , based on a collection of , a mathematical description of the radius of coverage of a . Such may be used to characterize the link portion of a repeater . al . based on outage capacity for a very short range outdoor indoor environment . In , the different of and in cellular , concluding that careful placement can improve capacity substantially by transferring from heavily loaded to lightly loaded . The . Relay Task Group and the WINNER Consortium have the use of both empirical and theoretical to predict path for wireless links with transmission below the clutter of , also applicable to links . While the accuracy of for diverse been the subject of extensive , their use in wireless more than treating each link individually , since the joint statistics of and links may not correspond to those of independent random . Statistics for power gains stemming from the use of or based on simultaneous in urban , as here , have to the best of our knowledge not been . In this work , we report on path loss of the and links in a typical outdoor urban environment . We evaluate diverse related to the performance improvement that can be when a in an area by a base station . We focus on modeling the statistics of the radio links involved and the resulting gains in received power by the mobile user . Our will be useful to calculate the achievable in coverage and in transmission experienced by mobile . were carried out in an area within a range of of the , which is at lamp post height , considering that this type of setting will be typical for a practical deployment of low complexity . To avoid our statistics we randomly chose and for the at various from the . The maximum range was by the requirement that at all , particularly those , the received power would be within the by our channel sounding system . We note that our system was capable of measuring path that would considerably exceed those compatible with a typical link budget in a wireless network . We also considered two of . One was chosen so as to maximize the likelihood of to the and the other chosen in close proximity to the , but from direct street view by construction . In this way we were able to consider the effect of blocking a , as may occur when a surrounding construction is after the placement of the ber repeater . Thus our statistics allow us to quantify the of a for randomly mobile within a given range considering in coverage and in transmission . From the joint data of path loss for the and links we were able to compare the effectiveness of Selection Combining and Maximal Ratio Combining at the mobile terminal . To this effect we considered typical transmit and antenna gains at the and and calculated received signal power at the under the condition of equal noise power for both . It was found that the statistical gain of over is less than under all tested , due to the random power imbalance between the links . Our also us to calculate between for the and links . The low validate an approach based on considering them as independent random . The measurement campaign extended over a period of during summertime . The urban area used as test bed in a Mar , Chile , a mix of high rise and two story with ranging between and , built on a plane region at sea level . of received power at were carried out at street level . The area is by nearby that a transmitter at a location typical for a base station covering a relatively large urban area . The transmitter height was above the measurement region at a distance of to the position . The was mounted in two on the exterior of a high building . The streets in the measurement area are lined with with ranging between and . All links were non line of sight , with due to the surrounding . All were within a radius of centered at the low height . Regarding the distance of these to the , were within , between and , and between and , which us to also obtain range dependent statistics . A schematic description of the terrain and of our measurement scenario are in . and . At the position , a continuous wave transmitter based on a oscillator at . with output power through a sector type antenna . The antenna used had azimuth and elevation at . All were within this . At the , the antenna used was a vertically dipole with gain , a signal at . with output power . Power at the were carried out an model NA spectrum analyzer that simultaneously tracked the at . and . . A noise of in a was low noise . The antenna used was a gain vertically dipole at a . height . The measurement system included a computer that acquired the spectrum analyzer at a rate of per second . Within the selected area all power the noise by at least . The was at an altitude of at two different : one at a street intersection so as to simultaneously illuminate two streets and the other one within of the placement but with no direct path to the adjacent streets . In the case there are and user , while in the second all are . The measurement campaign for both involved moving the along a straight path of about . at each of the that were selected at random within of the , as in Fig . . This was done a very slow moving vehicle in such a way that approximately equally spaced power were collected . At the frequency , this more than received power at spaced at least half a apart . From these we the path loss at each receiver position , which the calculation of average path loss and small scale fade statistics at each of the . To evaluate achievable power gains under realistic we calculated the received power at the mobile station assuming typical for transmit and antenna gains . the path for all measured we then the cumulative distribution function of the received power at the , considering the alone , the alone , the with the under a selection combining scheme and the with the considering a maximum ratio combiner . We assumed the existence of a with of transmission power . The and are assumed to be the same as the used in our with gains of and , respectively . For the we assumed that in most practical the would be attached to a wall and consequently only illuminate a sector of in azimuth . All our are in fact within a sector of such angle . We thus considered that a typical , sector antenna would be used , consistent with in . For the transmit at the we considered two that cover what could be considered the high and low of a practical deployment : and . To quantify the gains we dene as the increase in received power that can be to at a given availability level . Let be the received power at the . We denote the of power received from the alone as and the of the power received under as . The gain in received power when is then : The same type of of course to the gain through . We will use to calculate , at various availability , the power gain resulting from the use of a . In this section discuss the that can be when a low altitude height . We consider a random selection of within a radius of the . In order to verify that our selected urban do not deviate from those by for wireless , we our path loss with those by such . For the links between and , we found a good match to the COST model and to the alternative WINNER path loss model for the case in an operating frequency of . . With respect to these , our measured were slightly higher , and on average , with ... of and respectively . The measured for the street canyon links were far lower than those for links at the same distance , from to , with an average of . They were however higher by about on average than those by the advanced model for Type with both and below . For the collection of mobile that we considered , we also empirical for both and links according to a log distance model , with free space at . The resulting were and log respectively . We note that most of our links were partially by relatively large . To evaluate the effect of choosing a position , we considered two . One had an uncluttered path to two streets , while the other was in close proximity but by construction . The placement is here as Non and the second as O . The position links to some of the chosen . For a setting such as this , where both are below clutter , links are as being in a . Correspondingly , we use this notation and refer to the links as non street canyon . In the radius , half of the links are of the street canyon type while all O links are non street canyon . When considering a radius all links to the become of type . This according to the link is at which can be in practice to benet most from a given placement . As an example of the achievable gains we present in Fig . the of the received power at the within the radius , for the case where the at for both . All other are as in section . As seen , the for and are virtually indistinguishable , the shift being less that . We observe that the resulting from the use of a very much depend on its placement . For example , at coverage , the will guarantee a power of at least . an will only provide a slight improvement , the same power to of , while an will increase this coverage to . this calculation under the assumption of a transmit power of in coverage to and respectively . In what we summarize the power gains for various the importance of proper placement of the with respect to the intended . Figure . of received power at for coverage radius and power . height was . To evaluate the effect of coverage range we divided the where the power were carried out into three with of up to , and , to the . Table I the power gain as in with a at three availability for two transmit and the two . We recall that for radii of or less the placement street canyon type links to all , while only of the are in that condition for the radius . The consequence , clearly in the table , is that the gains available to of the sharply when the coverage radius is reduced to , i . e . when all of them are in a street canyon with respect to the . Both Fig . Figure . of received power at street canyon for coverage radius and power . and Table I illustrate the importance of proper of the . We further explore this below . Based on our above we divided the for all links with up to length into street canyon and canyon , rather than by distance as before . Table the for the power gain under this , again the previously detailed in section . The illustrate that very considerable power gains are available for street canyon links , even at low . In contrast , the row corresponding to the non street canyon links very modest gains regardless of the position . The latter were considering only that are of non street canyon type under both , so that are based on a common set of data . To illustrate the gains achievable under the most favorable and , we present in Fig . the for received power considering all street canyon within the range of , at a power of . When this with Fig . , it becomes clear that the street canyon are those that contribute most to the in received power . For example the will provide at least to of . This same minimum power will be available to of if a is included . this for an assumed transmit power coverage to virtually . Finally we calculated correlation of for the and links , for O and as where and represent respectively the path , the small scale , from the and the to a position . E and E are the statistical of these path at the distance under consideration , from a linear regression of path loss . distance . and are the standard of the with respect to these . In both O and these were found to be below . . When small scale are out , this to . . Our empirical suggest that a important gains in received power even when as low as and operating at the relatively low transmit power of . However , these gains are basically associated with the existence of or , equivalently , street canyon links to , and thus heavily depend on site and user . In all , the gains achievable are only marginally than those by a , to the fact that , in practice , the likelihood of the and the base providing comparable is very small . Virtually no correlation . was between the of the user link and the base user link . This treating them as independent random when modeling a wireless system by , the appropriate statistical description of the individual links . ﻿ This paper an empirical study of the achievable data of network multiple input multiple output zero forcing , zero forcing dirty paper and dirty paper actual by indoor wireless channel at . . Their are with those of conventional , in which either the base are not , or their interference is frequency division . The were taken in aisle to office and large unobstructed hall . The study of these that , at high signal to noise , and can yield more than a three fold increase in attainable data when to and . The gains are smaller , but still significant . At low the system is noise rather than interference limited , and only gains . The in this paper also show that collaborative such as can benefit from interference prone to yield transmission capacity . With regard to the propagation channel , the classical log normal plus fading model , with fitted to the scenario type , was found to be good at the statistics of the achievable data of all the considered . Index Wireless communication channel characterization and modeling , performance analysis . HERE is an ever increasing demand for high data in and with all the mobility provided by wireless technology . Since growing of are to be within confined , the performance of practical indoor wireless is to be limited , increasingly often , by interference . Therefore , in order to improve or even maintain high data , it will become necessary to make use of communication capable of the coupling between the various propagation links within a given service scenario so as to reduce interference and increase received signal power . This management of the interference produced by access and can be by of . all operating in a fashion turns the set of and into a network multiple input multiple output system , and the communication medium into a broadcast channel . Network hold the potential of interference in a , greatly increasing efficiency in wireless , . Several have been in the literature to take advantage of the high between several and a group of that is often in . The technique dirty paper , been shown to be capacity in this setting , and thus it is optimal , . is a nonlinear technique that full knowledge of channel state information at the transmitter . The high implementation complexity of the need to consider other simpler , near optimal transmission . One such technique , commonly to as zero forcing , , sum close to those of with smaller computational complexity . In , part of the interference is removed by linearly combining the intended for all so as to effectively obtain , from end to end , a lower triangular channel matrix . The of the channel matrix , which perfect at the transmitter side , it possible to avoid part of the interference . The effect of all interference is by in a sequential fashion . Another suboptimal technique , simpler than and , is zero forcing as in . Zero forcing is an entirely linear strategy . In this case , have perfect and to eliminate interference for all , yielding an effectively diagonal channel matrix between data and . Simpler to attain communication in a are if each a single user and its is limited to the radio link to that user only . In our work , we consider two possible . The first one is frequency division , that is , splitting the available spectrum into disjoint frequency , each one to a single user pair , with each at full power . The second approach , which will be to as the strategy , is to let each transmit at full power all the spectrum available , thus that interference from other will limit data as transmission power . The simpler and in general have inferior than those of and . On the other hand , the former impose the minimum possible load , since each needs to know only the data intended for and the related to the user it is serving . There exist other for communication in a that do not require among and whose performance is under certain better than that of and , such as fractional frequency reuse . Although it is known that in some specific see , e .., , our objective here is only to provide a few simple as a reference for comparison . It is understood that whichever is the choice , different propagation may favor different . The performance evaluation of diverse network for been in various works , . This included the assumption of log normal plus fading , and the use of the model . The effect of limited capacity between in overall performance is assessed in . Regarding the channel model , it may be reasonable to assume that small scale are independent for each channel when are several apart , but this may not hold for shadow . Several report on the correlation of in different of transmit and receive . To what extent such correlation may affect the network channel , based on widely base station , is not self evident . To the best of our knowledge , no based in support of the assumption that a network channel is equivalent to a collection of independent have been . The fact that in network all can act in a fashion taking advantage of , two related of capacity improvement . Interference between user can be reduced and , at the same time , the total received signal power at each user terminal can be . Since these effects depend on the degree of connectivity or , conversely , isolation , this the question of how much performance improvement can be for a given type of deployment scenario . In this paper , we evaluate and compare the maximum data achievable by the , and , for measured as well as by indoor , under a per antenna power constraint . These were all calculated under the assumption of perfect at the transmitter . Although this would be hard to attain with currently available technology , the serve as a comparison basis , being the best performance achievable under equally for all . Channel were for two representative : with alongside them , and large . A single slope path loss model with log normal shadow fading and Rice small scale , was found to be adequate in all the for the at which were taken . With regard to achievable data , we found that at high in the range of , and achieve about a three fold gain when to or . The gains of are somewhat smaller , depending on the scenario , but still quite significant . A particularly interesting finding is that both not only are able to effectively mitigate the effect of interference but also in some can exploit low isolation between user , to yield higher data than in with greater natural isolation . As would be , at low , where interference is not the dominant limitation on capacity , the gain over the non . Our study also that the log normal plus Rice fading model is accurate at the statistics of the maximum achievable by each of the network considered , when the model are selected according to the type of scenario . Thus , an indoor channel as a collection of independent , would yield similar to those of our based study , provided that the proper model are used . However , rather than justifying what could have been as somewhat arbitrary of to illustrate the achievable of a system , we decided to use actual measured channel data from typical indoor to validate our comparison . In the following we describe our measurement and the empirical from them . In all , the custom built channel sounder used of a single channel transmitter and a channel receiver operating at . for . The single transmit antenna was at that would in practice correspond to possible of a user . Four receive , one per , were at the typical of . The used for transmission and reception were coaxial , vertically . The transmit antenna was mounted on a long rotating arm and stepwise under computer control in degree . In all , were taken at night in the absence of pedestrian movement . For each of the aisle to office and , more than a complex by channel were collected , each vector the complex gains from a user location to the four . The single conversion receiver channel at . The receiver output were converted into a vector of complex channel gains the Fast Transform . Phase coherence was by locking the transmitter and receiver to . Exact synchronization of sampling data corresponding to an integer number of of the , which without the need for . For each position of the transmit antenna , the channel were simultaneously for second , and the total interval was partitioned into non of each . This us to verify the consistency of our which should only differ as a consequence of receiver noise . Since the capacity on the relative rather than the absolute phases of the , we calculated phase with respect to one of the , arbitrarily chosen as a reference . In all our , the ratio between the average gain magnitude and its fluctuation , calculated over the sequence of , . Thus by our , we further reduced the effect of the measurement noise . We in two of which we considered relevant and where , as our data subsequently confirmed , different propagation are to be . These scenario are as : Aisle to office : Channel were carried out in three different aisle to office . In all the building was a steel concrete structure with interior made of wood and . For these , the four receive were wall mounted at a . height along straight , with a separation from the interior . Adjacent were by approximately . The transmit antenna was at height inside various and adjacent to the aisle . These are non line of sight . The between the transmit antenna and the receive ranged from to . The of transmit and receive for scenario aisle to office is schematically in Fig . . In this figure , the and represent and user , respectively . The other two of this type had similar . In each office , were the rotating arm on three or four different user , more than apart from one another , as space would allow for simplicity , only one of these user per office is shown in Fig . . Large Hall : We from two large . The first one , hall , was a , glass central hall , about high , with concrete floor and several lateral leading to and on two . This hall is built with steel with concrete separating the hall from the adjacent . The four receive were at the of an imaginary rectangle , with each antenna at approximately from a wall on the hall , at of about . . The transmitter rotating arm was in different over a grid of within the rectangle formed by the receive . This is a line of sight scenario , in which link ranged from to . The second hall scenario , hall , was a gymnasium with wooden floor and concrete . The four receive were as in hall , while the rotating arm was in different over a grid inside the gymnasium . Transmitter receiver varied from to nearly . Before the channel to calculate the data achievable with network , we describe the statistical of the in each scenario . The measured channel gains proved to be consistent with what been in the literature for similar . We found that log normal shadow fading combined with or small scale in an excellent model fit to our , provided the model are to the measured data . The statistics of each type of fading are below . For each wireless link , small scale fading statistics were by the channel gain corresponding to a single turn of the rotating arm . As , in all aisle to office , these channel gains fading statistics that were well by a distribution . This is consistent with a situation . In the hall and hall , these gains fit a Rice distribution with factor between and . It is worth that despite the fact that these are , they are , as the previous , by strong propagation , although to a lesser extent . In all , the channel phases associated with each angular position of the rotating arm were uniformly distributed and uncorrelated . The large scale fading statistics were by calculating , at different , the of the channel gains over an arm rotation . The statistics of these average gains were well by a log normal distribution . More precisely , for each link distance , the path loss , in , corresponding to each rotation channel gain the behaviour of a random variable of the form log , where is a path loss exponent , is a zero mean random variable with variance and is the path loss in at , which we chose as . For each measured scenario , the model by was fitted to measured large scale path , finding and by linear regression , and then setting as the empirical variance of log . The of and so are listed in Table I . For each scenario type , a row in the model resulting from combining all data of its corresponding . It is worth that no evidence of a break point in the path loss exponent was found from the . More precisely , no slope were found to provide a better match in a least sense to our empirical data . This is consistent with what been before for short range indoor , . It was also found that the correlation between the shadow in the links between a transmitter antenna and any two was , in all , below . in modulus . This was true even when the two in all several apart were seen by the transmitter at an angle narrower than . In this section we present a brief review of the transmission to be in their relation to the channel model . A general wireless channel between single antenna and single antenna can be by a complex valued matrix . the vector of by the access by , the vector of received can be written as where the noise . i .. circularly symmetric complex with variance . Notice that ,, the element in the th row and th column of , is the narrow band channel gain between the th and the th user . Notice also that no joint of the output of the channel is , since it is assumed that between is not practical . For the three network considered in this work , can be as where the th element in the vector u is the information bearing signal intended for the th user , is a linear matrix , and : is either a non linear transformation , in the case of , or the identity matrix , in the case of . We note that an element be a function of two or more user only if the are able to operate . Following standard practice , we will assume that the of u are independent zero mean complex random with where x is the variance of the th element of , for some maximum power . All channel matrices considered in the sequel are by , that is , , our analysis to four simultaneously by four . We include and as , against which to compare the other three network . In the case of , each a single user , and all operate without , at maximum power over the same frequency band . In of the model , this toto be a diagonal matrix , or any row or column permutation of it . Since the user signal can be chosen freely , there is no loss in generality in assuming for this case that I , where I is the identity matrix . With this , the sum rate achievable with an system is readily found to be In this expression , , is the power of the signal as received by its intended user . On the other hand , user , produced by the serving all the other . , the interference affecting the th In this case , each at full power a fraction of the available spectrum . We will assume that this spectrum is partitioned into adjacent non equal width . Therefore , assuming the same total as for , the maximum achievable rate of is trivially given by The idea in is to eliminate , in the , all interference produced by the . To do this , the is chosen as . This all to have and each of them to process the intended to all . In this case , the highest sum rate per second per achievable under a is readily found to be and where the entry on the th row and th column of . The optimization problem defined by and been shown to be convex in . Therefore , a global maximum for the right hand side of can be numerically standard convex optimization . Notice that the solution to subject to will , in general , yield antenna transmit for one or more , ,...,. is known to perform poorly at low but it is easy to improve its achievable rate under such by a inverse of its true inverse . We denote this variant of as zero forcing . This technique was first in and then further studied in . The idea behind is to utilize the linear assure that the th user no interference from the , for all , and then use to avoid the effects of the interference . More precisely , is chosen so as to obtain where , are the of some lower triangular is the th element of the vector the unitary matrix in a decomposition of , i . e ., , an upper triangular matrix and the conjugate transpose operator . Choosing which the interference avoidance outcome by with . invertible as is the case in all the channel matrices considered in this work , then all this factorization differ only by a sign inversion in any subset of their . Therefore , in our case , the absolute value of each element of and thus well is fixed known . In , the effect of the interference by the sum at the right end of is by dirty paper . The latter , at the end , perfect as well as full knowledge of all user . After and the result through the channel , each is as if there had been no interference at all . Therefore , the achievable sum rate of is given by where , are the in the diagonal where the maximization is over all row power that satisfy the for each permutation . Notice that in this case the , in are the of in for the row matrix . It is easy to show that the optimization problem defined by and is also convex for each permutation . To see this , it to notice that the change of , and , ,, the optimization problem defined by , equivalent to , . The performance of been channel data in , under a sum power constraint , and in , under a . In both , was shown to be superior to and various non . Although the practical implementation of still specific code , we use this technique as an ultimate upper bound for the achievable data in each scenario . In , no a restriction is on the matrix . Here , the signal intended for user , , is by possibly all as if there were no other being , i . e ., . In contrast , the data at user is into , the fact that all have full , which together with knowledge of , its interfering effect . The resulting signal is then sent possibly all as well . Notice that , by doing this , is added to the signal received by user as interference . A similar process is employed to successively encode the data for the , previously as known interference . In this setting , the signal with power all through the th column of , thus at the corresponding user with power as before , , the entry on the th row , th column of . Therefore , the maximum rate achievable with this technique is Fig . . of rate per user , when , and achieve their maximum sum , under the power constraint , from empirical channel taken in scenario aisle . where the maximum is taken over all of the over all matrices and satisfying for each permutation . An efficient method to numerically solve the optimization problem by been in . This is the method we used to evaluate for the measured and channel data . In the next section we use the above to compare the performance of the various in realistic indoor . We use both actual measured channel matrices as well as channel matrices by the model from our . In this section we evaluate the maximum sum of , and as respectively by , , , and , subject to the , for the measured channel matrices in all . We then repeat the sum rate evaluation channel matrices by the model , the appropriate as derived from our . For the transmission , we calculate the per user at specific , i . e ., the maximum per user rate that is to be met or with some given probability . We further assume that the in this system is perfectly unbiased in that , on average , all are an equal amount of time . At the same time , our procedure of to user is designed to avoid that will yield high interference when better exist . To achieve both we proceed , on each time slot , as : Assign each user the access point providing the signal and group the with the same . It is assumed that the number of in each list is comparable . Over a long period of time this fairness as all have an equal chance of being , while the possibility of choosing in the same time slot more than one user the same preferred . More precisely , the channel matrix , in every time slot is such that This that interference prone such as are not unfairly in our comparison by particularly poor . In addition , and are ordered so that the th is the path loss for the th user . This a channel matrix in which the magnitude element in each row on the main diagonal of the matrix . The fact that the above procedure in equal likelihood of service for all was confirmed in our by that when the algorithm was repeated many times , any specific choice of position received service the same number of times . While it may be possible to find that further benefit the performance of the scheme , it should first be that these gains are not at the expense of fairness . As is to be , unobstructed hall provide less natural isolation between user than aisle to office . This in the fact that the hall were by a significantly smaller path loss exponent , see Table I . As a consequence , for any given distribution of between and , the channel matrices associated with hall will tend to be less diagonally dominant , i . e ., the off diagonal be on average . The effect of this on the rate achievable by each transmission technique will be later in this section . In all the , the noise variance in the receiver , for all full band i . e ., excluding , was chosen to be , which roughly to the thermal noise in a receiver with a noise figure of , operating at room temperature , over a of . For each aisle to office scenario , by channel matrices satisfying were selected by randomly choosing from the set of measured channel data for the corresponding site . Fig . . User at different for aisle to office first column and hall second column . The of the per user , are chosen so as to maximize the sum rate in each scheme , is shown in Fig . for scenario aisle to office , under the b with . The in the other aisle to office were quite similar . It can be seen directly from the graph that at this transmit power limit , the three network outperform and for all . We also observe that the performance of and are very close , which is consistent with before for i . i .. . It should also be noted that the optimization used only assure that the sum capacity of is the best of all . While this was in all our , it does not necessarily imply that at all availability , the per user rate of will exceed that of the other . In fact we found that for some , the would exceed those of , as can be from the at low . At high however , invariably proved to be best . As the transmit power limit is reduced , e .. to below , we found that an increasing number of have a non zero probability of being assigned zero rate when , or . This is a consequence of the fact that we are considering the per user when each of the network is for maximum sum rate , not fairness . As a consequence , the best strategy may include not serving some at all in some channel . This behavior will be in more detail below . The corresponding per user of each scheme in office scenario , as a function of , are shown in the first column of Fig . , for and . On the upper edge of each of these we have included an additional horizontal axis to provide an algorithm independent measure of the received signal to noise ratio for each site . This to the average received in the setting excluding interference i . e ., supposing interfering are turned off , that is where , is the th diagonal entry of the th . This would also be the true for all the full band considered here if the off diagonal of the channel matrix were zero . Since the latter condition never , this notion of is not the actual per user signal to noise ratio , which is algorithm dependent . Instead , it is the average ratio of the power received by a user from its , to the receiver noise . This ratio only on the environment , specifically on the average path loss between user , as can be seen from . Figure that , in scenario aisle to office and for a power limit , and attain a data rate gain in excess of three times , for both and , when with or . Similar gains are at higher power . In relation to this , we note that , loosely speaking , for large of , a gain over of at most four times would be , since for large of and assuming perfect interference cancellation , the improvement in capacity will be dominated by the ratio of transmission used , which is in our case . variance , which that the performance of is , in are small to the noise noise limited . In the specific case of , the power of some will be reduced below to meet the while the channel by choosing . The cost of such interference avoidance effort is than the benefit stemming from zero interference , yielding a sum rate smaller than that with at full power without . The poor performance in low is a well known shortcoming of pure , which can be upon by zero forcing , as in . We illustrate this in Fig . which in greater detail the behavior of all at low power for the case of availability . Under such the performance improvement of over becomes evident . As previously , it can also be seen in this figure that at low power , the objective of sum rate may be by Fig . . of rate per user , when , and achieve their maximum sum , under the power constraint , from empirical channel taken in scenario hall . not serving some at all , and as a consequence the rate that can be to of may drop to zero . A procedure similar to the one before was to generate by channel matrices in the two hall where were taken . The of the peruser with each network technique when for sum rate under power constraint are shown in Fig . , for scenario hall . In this figure we see again that the three network considered here provide higher per user data than and . The corresponding per user for several as a function of for this scenario type are shown in the right column of Fig . , where scenario hall been chosen . The for the other hall scenario are very similar and are for the sake of brevity . In this scenario , in the high range , and attain roughly the same gain , in per user over , as that in the aisle to office . On the other hand , in this more interference prone environment , the maximum are significantly reduced when to those of the aisle to office , by higher natural isolation between user . The gain of the over is also when to the aisle to office . Loosely speaking , this can be to the fact that the aisle to office channel matrices are more diagonally dominant than the hall channel matrices . As a consequence , and in view of the disc theorem , the determinant , at times , be smaller in hall . Since for the matrix the inverse of , it will be possible have in the hall . In view of the power constraint , this smaller signal and thus smaller sum for see . In contrast , is less sensitive to the smaller determinant matrices that arise in the hall . The reason for this behaviour can be found in the fact that the determinant equal to the product of all the diagonal of . Thus , a given decrease in the determinant , in general , entail a smaller reduction of rate for see . As can be from Fig . , high interference do not always result in per user . While this certainly for a non system as clearly seen from the and to a lesser degree may yield an performance in the hall in comparison to that in the better isolated aisle to office . The improvement is particularly significant a factor of around at low power , as seen at the left extreme of the . We note that the performance improvement is still evident when the comparison is carried out at equal , i . e ., when the in average path between user for the been . This behaviour can be by that , at low power , noise rather than interference is the relevant factor in limiting transmission . Since the channel matrices of the office are more strongly diagonal dominant , less power a user from access other than the one that is dominant . In contrast , in an environment with less isolation such as the unobstructed , the can take advantage of the fact that significant power from all bases will reach each user , while to turn most of this power into signal , not interference . Indeed , it can be seen from that for sufficiently large noise power , increasing the magnitude of the off diagonal produce a relatively increase in the numerator of the fraction within the log than on its denominator . Thus the signal plus interference ratio is . As transmit power however , interference becomes dominant , and the hall suffer from the need to compensate for this impairment . In order to assess the accuracy of the log normal plus Rice model at the maximum achievable by the in Section , we those from channel matrices by the general model for each scenario type aisle to office or hall , that is , the in the of Table I . The data by the model were , in general , in good agreement with those from empirical data , for each scenario . Figure of per user rate with respect Fig . . availability empirical and per user for scenario aisle to office . were from the model the scenario type in row All aisle to office of Table I . to maximum transmit power constraint for availability for the scenario aisle to office . It can be seen that , for this scenario , the from are smaller than those from empirical data . This may be to the fact that the scenario specific parameter for aisle in the third row of Table I is smaller than that of the corresponding general model used for the scenario type in the fourth row of Table I . Thus , in this case the actual received will be on average than those by the model . In this paper we have the data achievable in an indoor wireless by system by network such as zero forcing , zero forcing dirty paper and dirty paper . We these with those achievable with frequency diversity and no , measured and indoor channel matrices at . . Our show that a single slope log normal plus fading model with properly chosen is good at the performance statistics of these . By numerical evaluation based on empirical data we have shown that in the tested , at high , the network are able to achieve about a three fold increase in per user data over or , when considering and . It was also found that dirty paper can attain higher per user in hall , where interference is greater than in aisle to office . This difference was greater for high availability data and at small . Our also revealed that while in general higher data than and , this advantage is lost at low , particularly when high availability is considered . In contrast , based provide significant under virtually all practical . The would like to thank Silva , and for their valuable help . ﻿ There are two major which underly the design of an to digital converter ; namely when to sample and how to represent the amplitude of each sample . In the majority of past work , these two have typically been separately . Recently we have a novel algorithm which moving horizon optimization to determine both when and how to sample . Our work gave a heuristic description of the algorithm and , via , that a performance gain was in both the bit rate and the distortion level . This seemingly paradoxical result is due to the interpolative inherent in . The goal of the current paper is to give theoretical support to the algorithm . In particular , we provide on the probability that beneficial interpolation for the particular case of horizon length with flat , unity gain error weighting filter . The two fundamental that arise when an to digital converter are when to sample and how to represent the amplitude of each sample . Several deal with the first question quantization effects , see , e .., , and rise to irregular and or periodic non uniform sampling . Other deal with each value . In particular , conversion been in a wide range of , see , e .., , . Recently , conversion been extended to incorporate stemming from finite set constrained predictive control , see . work by the present , in , moving horizon optimization to address the dual question of when to sample and how to quantize . The scheme , which we in , to be marked as mute whenever it is desirable to replace them by a linearly value derived from their . Notice that this procedure implicitly to signal dependent adaptive non uniform sampling . Our work , gave an introduction to the algorithm and , via , that distortion in the conversion process can be reduced , when to , such as straight quantization , conversion and its step . Additionally , we that , in general , the number of for the digital representation of the signal can also be reduced . This seemingly paradoxical result from the interpolation inherent in the algorithm . In the current paper , we will give theoretical support to the algorithm by examining the under which beneficial interpolation . In particular , a bound on the probability that interpolation is derived for the special case of horizon optimization . The goal behind is to perform quantization so as to minimize both bit rate and distortion . It is based on the idea of linear interpolation between . can mark a sample as mute . Later , mute , are reconstructed by linearly between . This concept is in Fig . . Fig . a and show the reconstruction of an signal from a uniformly discrete time signal via straight quantization . The dashed line in Fig . a to reconstruction zero order hold . The benefit of Fig . . Reconstruction of an signal from via : a straight quantization ; linear interpolation linear interpolation is clear in Fig . , where the for the at times , , were by linear interpolation of of the . It can be that the reconstructed signal in Fig . b better the original signal . The algorithm on this observation and distortion by virtual quantization between the original every time a sample is . Additionally , data compression due to the fact that mute do not require to represent their value thereby reducing the average bit rate . Consider a scalar discrete time signal with underlying sampling rate . The purpose of to digital conversion is to obtain a representation of ak , i . e ., a discrete time signal . Each value is restricted to belong to a given finite set of , s , s ,..., . In the algorithm , is to be assigned as mute . This condition is by the symbol . Thus , the on can be expressed as : In order to incorporate mute into the conversion problem , we will make use of an interpolator whose output is defined as : that for to a vacant sample non mute sample before non mute sample after We can see that is a discrete time signal formed of all of and the linearly mute of . Notice that is not constrained to belong to quantization process : can be designed by a frequency weighted measure of the error , i . e .: the total number of of ak . In , is the error , defined as : Finite Horizon Formulation : To ensure that the are feasible , it is necessary to restrict the number of decision as well as the number of future of ak considered in the optimization . Thus , at sampling will replace the infinite horizon cost function by the following quadratic cost function defined over a shorter optimization horizon of length : The finite horizon cost in is determined by only a finite constrained . These decision are grouped into the vector Note that the last element of , that is , , must not take the value mute sample , because , if it did , then the calculation of the corresponding value of the sample would require the value of the successive value , namely , which outside and ahead of the horizon . Moving Horizon Approach : Minimization of the step cost in rise to the : Given , a feasible sequence over the optimization horizon . If one was to use the standard moving horizon concept as , e .., in , then only the first element would be . At the next optimization step the whole procedure would be repeated again with the horizon by . While this is in principle possible , the inclusion of mute to additional that are in . In general , the optimization method may give rise to several consecutive mute . In that case , if the horizon one step , the decision for the next element would have to consider the backwards propagation effect , which is not taken into account in the finite horizon cost . This would lead to performance degradation . To overcome this problem , the following modification to the standard moving horizon approach : such that , i . e ., is non mute . The horizon will then be by . The above procedure that , at every optimization step , the precursor is non mute . Remark : Notice that the use of mute rise to a non uniform sampling pattern , and that the average sampling rate will be lower than . Remark : The non interpolative such as straight quantization , conversion and the Converter of in a more general setting . Since the conversion process is carried in an optimal manner , see , the will , in general , give lower distortion than these other conversion . In the sequel , we will analyze the produced by the algorithm . In it was shown by simulation that lower quantization noise than traditional to digital conversion , and at the same time it less . Clearly , these gains depend on a high proportion of mute , where : here , I the number of been converted . Notice that in the case of horizon length , at most one out of every two can be marked as mute , limiting the value . . We also define the probability of a sample as : In it was also shown that the Bit Ratio , defined as the total number of by the output sequence from , namely R , divided by the total number of by traditional quantization , is given by : As a consequence , the data compression of on what proportion of are marked as mute and on the size of the constrained set nU , see . Towards the goal of for Pint see , in this section we will elucidate the under which the interpolation rather than quantization . The following are used : , a standard nearest scalar , with output set s ,..., . In the sequel , we will restrict our analysis to the case , in which , , and where si si We will also assume that input signal and output set are scaled such that no overload , i . e . or . However , restricted the horizon length to , the of the algorithm a imply that see . , if a given sample ak is a candidate for interpolation , then the previous converted sample result is non mute . Similarly , if the sample ak was to be marked as mute , then the conversion result for the sample just after it , namely , would be non mute . As a consequence , when considering the possible interpolation of ak , the expression for becomes Probabilistic analysis of is non trivial since its left hand side a sum of correlated continuous random . For our purpose , it is convenient to first assign to each quantization level an integer number in ascending order see Fig . and then define the Amplitude Band Number .. Region for a sample ak as This integer quantity the number of the quantization level for sample ak . As an illustration , for the example in Fig . , , and . Given the above , the ak can be decomposed into : is an integer number that could be as a coarse second difference of ak . Since ¨ is integer valued and , by assumption we only need to distinguish that fulfill , namely : It can be seen from that the for ¨ depend on the of ak , ak and ak . For the purpose of probabilistic analysis , it is more convenient to express it in of : These can be through careful examination of the given in , and Fig . . For sake of simplicity , are . could be numerically . Alternatively , it is possible to devise a graphical method to represent and solve , as in Fig . . In this figure , the range of of which satisfy are shadowed . The horizontal axis is , the value for the first difference see , as by the vertical marked . The vertical axis is a . The horizontal horizontal of mark yielding the same result for see . Thus , a given value for the of a that in yield either , or in order to satisfy the for interpolation of sample ak . The diagonal line ... in Fig . entirely inside the solution area , and the condition . If , this line to the case a a , that is , a ¨ . Since , by assumption we can conclude , in accordance to intuition , that in order to satisfy the condition for interpolation , a ¨ must be as close to zero as possible . In general , a given value of a ¨ will satisfy the condition of interpolation depending on the value of . It can also be seen from figure that the of the Fig . . Graphical solution to equation . Shaded represent the of satisfying it . Additionally , if , the difference between each of these periodic and the diagonal line the for a ¨. The for a ¨ then depend upon . Fig . the effect of quantization error in the range for a ¨ that the condition for interpolation , for three different of a . In particular , it can be from and that , if a ¨ , then We can utilize the framework established in analyze Pint see . Towards this goal , we interpret , a and a ¨ as random which we denote by , a and ¨ a respectively . Assuming that is uniformly distributed on the interval and statistically independent from a and a ¨ , it is possible to obtain see Fig . , for a given value of a and a ¨, the set of to which must belong in order to satisfy . Since is uniformly distributed , the total length of these , which we will denote here as a ,¨ a , is proportional to the probability that the condition for interpolation is satisfied . Thus , the conditional probability of interpolation given that a and ¨ a is given by : Note that the function , a random variable a ,¨ a . If the joint probability density function for a and ¨ a is fa ,¨ a ,, then Pint can be calculated via : Note that the and in the first integral arise from the fact that , , as previously noted . Function , can be numerically or graphically . Fig . , y for three different of . Based on the analysis on section , the probability of interpolation for a given signal depend on the statistical of the first and second of the signal . Clearly , if fa ,¨ a , is known , the probability of interpolation can be precisely from . However , in practice it is desirable to estimate the probability of interpolation a , based on coarse information about the signal . We present next a lower bound for Pint for the case where only the second moment of ¨ a , that is , E ¨ a , is known . THEOREM : For each y , , and provided E ¨ a , a lower bound for the probability of interpolation can be by where ¨ a is the probability density function of ¨ a . Equation then to REMARK : Clearly , the above theorem on the choice of y . Since , by construction , y is monotonically decreasing , the derivative of the right hand side of is zero only at the global maximum . Thus , the value for the bound can be found numerically by y . were by the algorithm to two quality music each of length , . We grouped the into , for of a and of a ¨, and calculated the statistical of interpolation within each category . According to the law of large , the greater the number of in each category , the closer the statistical frequency will approach the actual value of the probability of interpolation for each category . More specifically , for a category defined as ak such that a and a ¨ , it can be that for highly the statistical frequency will approach the conditional probability of interpolation , as , . show the for quantization . In these , the dashed line the function , for the corresponding value of see Fig . . It can be seen that statistical frequency ,. The in the of the from the dashed line are from the fact that in some the number of was rather small . This is particularly true for of a or a ¨ . Despite that , it is important to verify that the for which no interpolation is indeed no at all except an isolated bar on the extreme right in Fig . , from a category of one sample whose existence is by the fact that that category with a not strictly equal to zero . Similarly , for the where , probability of interpolation equal to , all were in deed . To illustrate the derived in section , we converted different audio , each one with and quantization . For each signal , the value for E ¨ a was from the entire signal . Fig . the empirical of interpolation . Furthermore , it the lower from by choosing which . and y which . . It can be from this figure that the lower , although weak , are confirmed by . In particular , as by the , the empirical probability of interpolation as E ¨ a . This paper a recently algorithm which simultaneously reduced bit and lower distortion . The algorithm moving horizon optimization together with interpolation . In this paper , we give a lower bound on the probability that interpolation can be beneficially used for the particular case of horizon length and flat error weighting filter . Simulation have also been which the validity of the lower bound in practical . ﻿ In order that can be , or it is necessary that they first be converted into digital form . This , in turn , the problem of how to digitize data so as to achieve the best trade off between data load and performance , i . e ., how to make the most out of a little . Two are involved in this problem , namely temporal quantization i . e ., sampling and spatial quantization . These two have traditionally been separately . Indeed , there substantial literature dealing with the temporal quantization problem , covering both band limited and non band limited . The usual underlying paradigm is that of an analysis filter , by a sampler , by a reconstruction filter . Various of this architecture can be once other have been . On the other hand , spatial quantization been studied extensively for a given sampling strategy , particularly in the framework of sigma delta conversion . Finally , it is also possible to formulate the joint design problem for sampling and spatial quantization . This typically to enhanced performance to that achievable by considering the two separately . This paper will survey the general area of sampling and quantization and analyze for efficient data for signal and control . We will show how , on the one hand , contemporary control theory can contribute to the design of sampling and quantization and , on the other hand , how these impact on the performance of modern feedback control . Key : Sampling , quantization model predictive control , constrained control , control We live in a data rich world . Most technological operate by first , from the world into digital . This is a necessary precursor to allow to be , and without degradation other than that by the to digital conversion itself . The above was indeed the motivation that led Alec to invent pulse code modulation seven ago . In his patent , the main of , namely : These are remarkable for the time they were . Indeed , most of these have only become reality in recent times . Furthermore , the validity of the first two to be formally determined after they were , and is still subject of ongoing research . In the pursuit of better quality at lower bit and lower , increasingly parsimonious are continually so as to acquire , process and represent digitally . This topic also important theoretical , from such as information theory , functional analysis , optimization , communication theory wavelet theory . As we will discuss in this paper , also control theory much to contribute to this circle of . Conversely , much of the theory and from digital signal are highly relevant to several of control , e .., control , where parsimonious signal representation is a key element , see , e .., . In the present work we present some of the main of sampling , quantization and reconstruction of , continuous time . We will describe reconstruction quality and relate it to design such as filter complexity , data rate and sampling frequency . We also present some concerning the joint problem of sampling quantization , on one side , and reconstruction on the other . We limit our analysis to uniform sampling of scalar , sampling and reconstruction by single as opposed to filter , with scalar output and we will not discuss any related to further symbol . The layout of the remainder of the paper is as : Section the of quantization and some of the that justify the introduction of a more general model for a reconstruction system . Section the sampling and reconstruction in a frame theoretic perspective . Section is a review of some recent generalized on the sampling and reconstruction problem . In Section we present some basic of scalar memory less quantization and . Section feedback . In particular , some of the basic of predictive and noise shaping to digital are . In Section we present noise shaping that generalize based on model predictive control . Section to analyze the joint problem of the quantization and sampling reconstruction design , some recent and . In Section we show how related to sampling and quantization can be in control . Section . Finally , an Appendix is included with some of the basic of frame theory necessary to understand several of the in the main body of the paper . In this section we will first describe as a basic architecture used in AD conversion . Various of will then motivate us to introduce later a more general framework . We consider the simple and system by the block diagram in Fig . . The usual paradigm associated with this setup is that the input signal a ,, is taken to be band limited to some frequency , say , . Then , in accordance with the sampling theorem , the sampling step is chosen as . Since the input signal is directly , we have a , . The nearest scalar in Fig . to the non linear transfer function , defined by where is the quantization step see Fig . and rounding to the integer value greater than a . Thus , the output of in Fig . is the sequence of u , where The synthesis Fig . is , in the case , an ideal continuous time low pass filter with cut off frequency t and impulse response ,, where . The output the , continuous time signal a , given by the mixed convolution If there were no quantization i . e ., if , then u would equal for all . In this situation , a in would equal exactly the input a for all , since , by virtue of the sampling theorem , if a is to , it can be reconstructed from by the interpolation formula In the presence of quantization , it is generally no longer true that a a . Nevertheless , it is reasonable to expect that , if the quantization step is small , then the u will be close to the a for all , and the output of the simple system of Fig . will be close in some sense to the input a . Unfortunately , this and other in the above model are often far from realistic , as next . Whilst the method above is certainly attractive , it from several that hinder its usefulness in many practical . In what , we will describe some of the main of this architecture . Synthesis Filter The ideal low pass filter used in Fig . for synthesis cannot be in practice . Firstly , it is non causal . A very close approximation of the ideal low pass filter would still be non causal , which it out from any delay sensitive application . Secondly , an ideal low pass filter an infinite impulse response length . For practical low pass , the closer they mimic the ideal filter , the longer the impulse response will be . One problem with a long , slow impulse response is that it the stability of the reconstruction , in the sense that bounded in the are able to produce unbounded point wise error in the reconstructed output . As an example , consider the ideal low pass reconstruction in . It is easy to show that any bounded periodical error in the a of the form , with , will yield an unbounded reconstruction error in the L norm . The second difficulty with a synthesis filter with long but finite impulse response is cost and complexity : In where synthesis is accomplished via discrete time FIR , longer impulse require higher computational complexity . Another problem with the ideal low pass synthesis filter model is that , in many practical , the synthesis filter is not a design choice , but is by other . In such , the synthesis filter can have almost any frequency response . An important example of this situation is that of , where the plant itself can be thought of as part of the synthesis Fig . . We will return to this situation later in Section . Not Necessarily Band Limited Input The assumption of band limitedness of the input signal a is also very restrictive . Most real have to deal with over a finite time interval strictly speaking , any non zero finite duration signal is not band limited . Even when a virtually infinite duration , perfectly band limited signal , only a finite number of can be used for the reconstruction . This truncation , i . e ., part of the inter sample the input signal is not by the . On the other hand , it is often the case that the sampling rate cannot be made high enough to completely avoid . Whilst this is commonly dealt with by a low pass anti filter before sampling , this paradigm may have significant whenever the signal relevant information in the high frequency part of its spectrum , or when the is not perfectly band limiting see , e .., , . In this case other of analysis should be considered . Availability of the Input Signal Before being able to sample the value of any physical variable , it is necessary to convert it to an electrical signal by of a transducer , which in itself is a dynamical system . It is often the case that sampling is in the transducer itself . In this case , one does not have access to the underlying continuous time signal , but only to the taken . Depending on the situation , this can deprive further of knowledge of important inter sample behaviour of the physical variable . It is then necessary to make a wise design of the synthesis stage , so that the input signal can be well at the output see , e .., , , . Quantization , Sampling Frequency and Data Rate In the simple system of Fig . , quantization is done element wise by a nearest , see . Thus , if one to obtain a small reconstruction error , one would naturally aim at reducing the quantization step . In practice , however , the reduction of is limited by cost and structural . Alternatively , if the statistics of the input signal are known , then the mean square reconstruction error can often be reduced by a in which the quantization step is not uniform along its dynamic range . Moreover , even though the sampling theorem that when the are un an increase of the sampling frequency cannot improve reconstruction since it is already perfect , the situation with is different . More precisely , when quantization is , sampling rate can be to reduce quantization error see Sec . . . Thus , one often the chance to compensate the effects of coarse magnitude quantization by of a finer time quantization , i . e ., faster sampling rate . The reader may be well aware of this in bit used in some . In practice , the the sampling rate and the number of quantization is often constrained by data rate . This is so because , although not explicitly shown in Fig . , the sequence of u , in binary form , to be or before reconstruction place at another location in time and space . This that the total number of , or similarly , the data rate , is limited . In principle , if the nU , then the data rate will be approximately given by It is possible , however , to reduce the data rate by an efficient of the sequence of compression . When such is applied , the data rate limitation into an information rate limitation , precisely given by the entropy of the sequence of at the output of the . with entropy are also variable rate . In this paper , however , we will not consider such . Thus , we will only consider fixed rate , and the data rate will be given by . In view of the of conversion above , a more general model for the analysis of sampling , quantization and reconstruction is in Fig . . Weighting Filter Figure : A more general sampling , quantization and reconstruction system . For the remainder of this work , we will restrict our analysis to input a which are as finite energy scalar of a single parameter i . e ., a L . For example , we could think time , for the case of time scalar . Thus , the analysis Fig . for all the continuous time linear of the input that before the sampling place . The sampling process is assumed uniform i . e ., regular sampling , with fixed sampling interval . The synthesis Fig . the linear in continuous time possibly with some discrete time filtering applied to the u . The output as a . It a in some well defined sense . The in Fig . is generalized because it is to have access to previous and future input during operation , and scalar , because it a sequence of , one at a time . We will only discuss of this type in the remainder of this paper , which a definition of the class of generalized scalar : Definition Generalized Scalar . Any quantization strategy that can be within the following • The no access to the continuous time signal a , but only to the . • The a sequence of u at a constant rate , one element time . The total in the output sequence the number of input . • Each of the in the output sequence of the can take only from a finite , given and fixed set of U , i . e , the output of the Note that this definition for the uniform , nearest scalar in as a special case . The last condition in Definition that the generalized scalar in Fig . is , in principle , to determine the output u , for any , based upon knowledge of the entire sequence , i . e ., it is a dynamic system . Therefore scalar with memory such as the predictive and noise shaping to be in Section are special of the generalized scalar . In Fig . an error frequency weighting added . Inclusion of this filter the fact that , depending on the application , the practical impact or cost of the reconstruction error is frequency dependent . Accordingly , the instantaneous error a a to produce a frequency weighted error signal eH . Based on the general setup in Fig . , throughout the remainder of this work the performance of the system will be assessed in of the squared L norm of the signal eH : As above , a paradigm which many signal of a filtering or analysis stage , a sampling stage , a digital , discrete time stage and a post filtering also to as synthesis or reconstruction stage . It been shown that these are equivalent to a sequence of between see , for example , , , and . This viewpoint one to use the powerful of , and study and design sampling and reconstruction . It for elegant to otherwise complex design optimization , by projection . To the best of our knowledge , the first author to apply theory to the sampling problem was . in . In he derived sampling for random stationary complex exponential . Further insight and for were provided by . in for other , see . Several with the space approach to the sampling problem in subsequent . Among , a paper by a unified approach to generalized sampling . It the idea of regarding the approximation of in a , more general , finite dimensional reconstruction space , instead of to perfect reconstruction by . Interestingly , in , a finite number of of a signal was used , as opposed to an infinite number of raw . By the early , the recently wavelet theory , to stimulate a strong revival of sampling theory see , for example , , , , by the mathematics of basis and in . This framework for the re formulation of the sampling and reconstruction problem in more general and practical inter , sampling and reconstruction from finite , , study of arbitrary input and reconstruction , , , sampling of non band limited , , , , non uniform sampling , , filter , , and and interpolation , . of the sampling and reconstruction in a space frame theoretic context . For a more complete formal analysis , see , for example , , , , , , . It will be shown next that the analysis and sampling , which map continuous time into discrete time , can be seen as the analysis operator of the sampling frame . This frame is made of of the time reversed impulse response of the analysis filter . Similarly , the reconstruction process , which discrete time into continuous time , can be seen as the synthesis operator of a reconstruction frame . It is made of of the impulse response of the reconstruction filter . Filtering and Sampling Consider the input signal a in the block diagram of Fig . . Assume that a is known to belong to some space of , say A L . the output of the analysis filter , which impulse response L . Then , is given by the convolution : If one now a taking the of at time , sampling process in fig . , one a where . One can see that the last integral in to the conventional inner product in L , defined in , between a and . If we now define the shift operator by Therefore , the input signal can be seen as the result of a sequence of inner . From and Definition see Appendix , this is indeed the process by the analysis operator associated with the frame . As a consequence : Synthesis or Reconstruction Consider now the conversion from the discrete time sequence u to the continuous time signal a , see Fig . . If we denote the impulse response , then the band limited reconstruction scheme in can be generalized to : It is clear from Definition Appendix that the reconstruction process can be by the synthesis operator associated with the frame : In this new setting , becomes the generating function for the principal shift invariant reconstruction , which is , in general , different from the space of band limited . which it a discrete time sequence u and a continuous time function , yielding a continuous time function a . If the impulse response is chosen such that is a sequence and therefore a frame for span , see , then is a bounded operator , and the output a u L for all The Combined Sampling and Reconstruction Process It from the above that the sampling analysis and reconstruction synthesis process can be stated as a sequence of between : Therefore , in the absence of quantization i . e ., if u , , the complete process can be expressed as It is interesting to note that the above allow one to determine the ultimate and of a sampling and reconstruction system in of the related to sampling rate and . More precisely , the analysis and synthesis alone determine , respectively , the class of that can be sensed i . e ., the sampling space and the class of that can be i . e ., the reconstruction space . A rather remarkable implication is that in the intermediate one can only design the between these , but not expand the sampling and reconstruction themselves . As a consequence , the design of an AD conversion scheme can be thought of as two , namely : . Design of the between in the sampling space and in the reconstruction space i . e ., design of discrete time , quantization . In what , we will describe of the separate design of the sampling reconstruction strategy and of the quantization method . Some of the joint design problem will be later in Section . In this section we discuss the effect that analysis and synthesis have on the reconstruction quality . We will assume that the input and output are given and will neglect quantization effects . The implicit trade off here is between the quality of the reconstruction and the computational complexity and delay in the sampling and reconstruction . As in Section , the ultimate sampling and reconstruction of a system are limited by the sampling and reconstruction . These , in turn , are entirely determined by the choice , as well as the sampling interval . This that , whenever possible , the design focus mostly on the sampling and reconstruction that one to obtain . Further refinement can be by careful design of discrete time which can be right after the analysis before the synthesis filter , see Fig . . Interestingly enough , it been shown that , in general , the optimal is by making the sampling and reconstruction of one another , . To achieve this for a given analysis frame , one can insert a discrete time correction filter before the synthesis filter to make the synthesis frame the dual of the analysis frame . Although , in general , the dual frame of some given frame is not unique , there only one shift invariant dual frame i . e ., a unique correction filter for each given shift invariant frame . In what , we will consider the following situation : Depending on the relation between the input space A , sampling reconstruction space , we will consider three of reconstruction , namely : consistent , orthogonal and perfect reconstruction . Consistent Reconstruction The first and most generally attainable reconstruction goal is that of consistent reconstruction , first in by and , see . A signal approximation is said to be consistent if it the same as the original signal when re into the system , i . e . a is a consistent approximation of a A if and only if The idea of consistent reconstruction is in Fig . . a ; in this figure , a is , the null space of , see . Figure : a Consistent reconstruction oblique projection ; reconstruction orthogonal projection . The notion of consistent reconstruction was first for bases in , and then extended for in , , , , and . Orthogonal Reconstruction The second type of reconstruction is orthogonal reconstruction , also reconstruction . It additional see next section . In this type of reconstruction , the system , for any input a A , the output a that It is well known that this notion is equivalent to an orthogonal projection of the of A onto the output space see Appendix A . . . The intuitive notion of orthogonal projection is in Fig . .. Note that the a shown in this figure is , indeed , the point to a in the output space . Perfect Reconstruction The third , and most demanding notion is that of perfect reconstruction , i . e ., As will be shown below , depending on the A , and , perfect reconstruction can still be possible , even , for example , for non band limited , , . In the remainder of this section we will describe on the sampling and reconstruction method which ensure that each of these can be . Under the assumption that the sampling and reconstruction satisfy the direct sum condition necessary and sufficient have been found in order to make the sampling and reconstruction system achieve consistent reconstruction and , as particular , optimal and perfect reconstruction as well , , . For shift invariant and , the direct sum condition can be conveniently expressed in the frequency domain based on the and the null of A and respectively , as A and , where Proposition , Proposition . . Let , L , and assume that and are frame . Then the following are equivalent : It is shown in that , if the direct sum condition is satisfied , then a is a consistent reconstruction of an input a if and only if a is the oblique projection of a , the null space of see Appendix A . . . Such a projector , by , is defined as The following the concept of oblique dual frame and its relation with the oblique projector : Lemma from , Lemma . . Assume that and are let span , span . Assume that . Then the following are equivalent : Furthermore , if the above three equivalence are satisfied , then is an oblique dual frame of is an oblique dual frame of on From Lemma one can see that becomes an oblique projector if and only if is an oblique dual frame of in . Although , as with the conventional case considered in Definition see Appendix A . , the oblique dual frame within a given space is not unique , the shift invariant oblique dual frame of a shift invariant frame is unique . This that , once reconstruction and sampling are defined , there a unique analysis filter that the analysis frame the oblique dual of the reconstruction frame . Conversely , there a unique reconstruction filter that turns the reconstruction frame into the dual of the analysis frame . An expression in the domain for the oblique dual frame condition in of the frequency of the analysis and reconstruction is given in , which , by virtue of Proposition , can be as : Theorem from , Theorem . . Let , L and assume that and are frame , the , respectively . If L , then the following : • The result in one to obtain a shift invariant oblique dual frame for a a continuous or discrete time correction filter with transfer function just before or just after the analysis filter . With such an arrangement , and provided i and in Theorem are satisfied , the system will yield perfect all a and consistent reconstruction for all a L , as . • Conversely , from the reciprocity of oblique dual , also one to obtain the frame for a given . This can be by a continuous or discrete time correction filter with transfer function defined in . Notice that this correction filter does not alter the space associated to the stage in which it is inserted , i . e ., if the impulse response of is , then . From the previous it that , if the direct sum and duality are met , then necessary and sufficient condition for each type of reconstruction can be stated as : for Perfect Reconstruction Perfect reconstruction only for all a is possible , without any further requirement for Reconstruction Orthogonal Projection If , additionally ,, then becomes an orthogonal projector onto , i . e ., , see Appendix A . . . This that the output signal a will be the best approximation the input signal a , i . e ., it will minimize . for Consistent Reconstruction Oblique Projection Consistent reconstruction will be for all a L without further . Quantization is the process of into which belong to a finite set . The representation of with infinite accuracy would require an infinite number of . Quantization one to achieve a approximate representation of infinite , which in turn can be with a finite number of . Hence , the main purpose of to digital conversion is to compress data , whilst aiming to obtain the best possible approximation of the signal . This is to be within data rate and according to some fidelity criterion , i . e ., making most out of a little . As already in Section . , the to be in this paper belong to the family of generalized scalar , see Definition . As such , generate an output sequence u whose are constrained to belong to a set of nU see , the quantization alphabet U , now formally defined as : Traditionally , quantization been only in of discrete time performance , usually looking at the between input and . the input and the and u , the is given by : We will next briefly discuss the realization of the generalized scalar in Fig . : the zero memory scalar . Its performance will be in of the as defined in . Other of the generalized scalar , such as quantization with memory by of feedback and quantization with memory and preview , will be in and , respectively . For a more comprehensive analysis of quantization see , e .., , , . Scalar quantization is also to as zero memory quantization , since each sample is previous or future . Scalar partition the real line into a set of nU disjoint and consecutive I I ,..., , . A unique scalar from U is associated to each interval in I , usually satisfying , i ,..., nU . Depending on the choice of the partition , either a uniform or a non is . Uniform The scalar is the nearest uniform in Section . , where the partition of the input space the real line is given by and the of U satisfy , i ,..., nU the positive extreme output extreme input the is said to be if the input . If the probability density function of the is smooth and the quantization step is small enough , then the quantization error can be approximately as a random variable with uniform distribution over , see for precise , and the mean squared error between the the output u of the is given by the distortion measure : In of the number of to represent each sample , we first note that Non Uniform For a given number of per sample , the be further reduced if the probability density function of the is known . This can be by a non uniform quantization step . Any form of non uniform quantization can be accomplished by complementary non linear before and after a nearest . The first block is a compressor , and its transfer function is a monotonically increasing function satisfying The complementary block after the is expander , and a transfer function . an expression first derived in , one that , for a non uniform with a large number of quantization , compressor characteristic and without overload , the due to quantization is given by where is the of the and . The no overload assumption and , and that , Notice that for i . e ., with a uniform quantization step , becomes . Clearly , minimization of in a compressor the of the input signal . The optimal compressor characteristic is given by the solution to where a is a constant such that . When the solution of is inserted into , the without overload and for found to be where s and are the variance and the of an individual input sample , respectively . In relation to , it must also be pointed out that see must be made several times the assumption and to be valid . For more about the derivation and of this and other related to scalar quantization , see , e .., and the therein . It is possible to further reduce the reconstruction , while keeping the quantization step constant , by increasing the sampling frequency above the frequency . This technique is . For ratio not too large , the mean square error is reduced as , i . e ., where D is the when . Notice that this can also be seen as a particular case of the resilience of redundant frame in Appendix A . see also , e .., , . However , as the sampling frequency is , quantization noise becomes more and more correlated and the decrease rate of . Furthermore , asymptotically a lower , strictly positive limit . The bigger is , the higher this limit becomes . A quantization step also the decrease rate of to depart from sooner . The reconstruction error can be further reduced , for a given ratio , by the use of feedback . Furthermore , feedback A yield a that steadily . Thus , one can obtain an arbitrarily low , for a given , by sampling fast enough . These are briefly in the next section . Quantization that use feedback can be grouped into two main : predictive and noise shaping . of the first type are the delta modulator and differential pulse code modulator see , e .., . The popular sigma delta converter , see , e .., , to the latter type . The following is a basic description of the main of both converter , based mainly on the approach in . In the sequel , the quantization process is as additive noise , corresponding to the quantization error of a scalar . In this diagram , U and correspond , respectively , to the of the sequence and the output sequence u in Fig . . Thus , the in the dashed line rectangle in Fig . is a particular realization of the generalized scalar in Fig . . The filter included at the end of the chain in Fig . can be considered as part of the reconstruction stage in Fig . . The E and in Fig . correspond to the of the discrete time in each of the respective . is the transform of the error by the scalar , i . e ., U E . From Fig . , the expression for the output U is found to be The key to the noise reducing of the predictive on the prediction filter . This filter is designed to minimize the variance of the prediction error see Fig . . It is common to assume that the quantization noise is any of the in the loop . Thus , is chosen so as to reduce the contribution of to E in . By doing so , the variance energy per sample of the sequence that the is reduced . This in turn one to reduce the quantization step in the scalar , without increasing the number of quantization to avoid overload . Thus , by reducing a measure of the term in , one is also reducing the quantization noise contribution , and the is reduced accordingly . Of course , how much distortion reduction is will ultimately depend on how predictable the sequence is , i . e ., on the of . It will also depend on how well the prediction filter is able to capture this predictability It been shown that the of the scheme in Fig . with the ratio not faster than , where is the order of the filter . If an additional ideal low pass filter with cut off frequency is after see Fig . , then the is reduced at most as A common choice of is of the form . Note that the predictive in Fig . can reduce distortion even if are at frequency , as long as the input are correlated . If the input are uncorrelated white noise , then the predictive is unable to yield any reduction at all . It is the increase in the of the input produced by which for the behaviour in the reduction rate . The second main category of feedback to the noise shaping such as A , first by and in . One possible form to represent a noise shaping is in Fig . . Again , and U correspond , respectively , to the of and u in Fig . . The noise shaping within the dashed line rectangle in Fig . is a particular realization of the generalized scalar in Fig . . where the noise shaping filter a degree of freedom in the design process . Since is band limited , and because of , it is generally convenient to choose to be a high pass filter , see , e .., . With this choice , the quantization noise is within the signal band whilst outside of it see Fig . . This compensatory increase in the off band quantization noise is unavoidable , as determined by the Bode integral theorem Because of the frequency shaping of the quantization noise , most of its energy can be suppressed by low pass filtering U , leaving only the in band portion of the quantization noise . By doing so , it is in that the by increasing ratio at most as , where is the order of the noise shaping filter . Most common for have the form , where is an FIR filter . As in control , one of the beneficial of feedback in to the robustness of the resultant system . Indeed , if properly designed , feedback allow one to achieve high accuracy quantization despite the use of inaccurate building such as the scalar itself , which can be to have a very coarse and uncertain quantization step . This feedback the preferred choice for many practical . It should also be noted that the above decay rate of the with increasing ratio is not fast enough to be rate distortion efficient . Indeed , AD require , in general , a higher data rate than a system with finer quantization and no to achieve the same distortion . This can be seen by that , for feedback , the only with increasing the ratio , as O n , while the with increasing the per sample i . e ., reducing as O B , i . e ., exponentially . Nevertheless , recent show that the L norm of the reconstruction error in can be reduced as O , , by for each ratio an appropriate noise shaping filter from an infinite set of . Following a different approach , quantization based on threshold exhibit a reconstruction that exponentially with increasing ratio , , and are thus rate distortion efficient . Interestingly , control theory can be used to design the generalized scalar in Fig . . More precisely , since the output of the is constrained to belong to a finite alphabet of , the situation can be as a control problem with input . This point of view us to apply Moving Horizon Optimization MHO to achieve a more effective noise shaping . This paradigm Model Predictive Control , and proved to be a powerful tool for dealing with constrained , , , , , . The quantization scheme so , Step Optimal Converter , typically , while the latter as a particular case . We will present next some of the fundamental behind the . The remainder of this section been basically from , A more general formulation to analyze the discrete time performance of noise shaping quantization can be derived from the block diagram in Fig . . In Fig . , and u represent , respectively , the input and the output sequence . The motivation for quantization noise shaping been Figure : Scheme to generate the frequency weighted quantization error sequence . by a frequency weighted reconstruction error sequence , by In , is a stable , causal , linear , time invariant filter , which can be via : where A , , R the state dimension , i . e . the order of the filter . This filter can , e .., represent the typical low pass filter in conversion , see e .. , in order to decimate the converter output . In audio it sense to choose as a acoustic model of the human hearing , compare also with work in , . The performance of the quantization process in Fig . will be by the measure The distortion in the conversion process in a frequency . If the generalized scalar in Fig . is designed to minimize the , then its u will approximate the input , while the un quantization error , a u , will tend to have a spectrum similar to that of the inverse of the filter . Thus , the method will shape the quantization noise spectrum , just as the converter in Section does . Unfortunately , minimization expression is not possible in practical , due to the complexity of the associated combinatorial optimization problem . Furthermore , in the general case , an optimal would need to view the entire signal . This is clearly unsuitable for on line . In order to obtain a more practical method to minimize the cost in , it is convenient develop a recursive conversion method , which can be on line . For that purpose , we will first introduce a cost measure over a finite horizon , to deploy later the concept of moving horizon approximation , see . Finite Horizon Formulation A practical conversion scheme , suitable for , must operate sequentially , a restricted number of decision and considering a moderate number of future of . For this purpose , it is convenient to characterize as the output in a state space representation of This relation directly from . In , is the state vector . Note that , due to the structure of , at time the impact of the past u on future of is exactly by of the present state ,. Given the above , we next replace the infinite horizon cost function by the finite horizon cost : In , the prediction horizon a given positive semidefinite matrix . is a measure of the distortion over the prediction horizon plus a measure of the final state , x . These are formed based upon the model . The finite horizon cost in into account only a finite constrained . The value computational complexity for the minimization of . This should be with the infinite number of decision in the original cost . a finite the . a design parameter , it can be chosen so that the minimization can be carried out on line . Moving Horizon Approach As noted above , the to , a feasible output sequence for time . Thus , in principle , one could think of an implementation in , where the minimization is carried out . Unfortunately , the last few of depend only on a small window of the distortion To improve performance , the step optimal converter only the first element of , say u . It becomes the th element of the converter output sequence , by setting : At the next sampling instant , this new state value is used to minimize the cost , yielding u . This procedure is repeated ad . As in Fig . for the case , the prediction horizon of the criterion forward as . The past is forward in time via the state sequence , thus , yielding a recursive scheme . The resultant architecture the . It an to digital converter architecture which the frequency weighted conversion distortion , based upon Model Predictive Control . Interestingly , it been shown that the with and to the converter , see . However , it is easy to see that , in general , better performance , since more data is taken into account in the decision process of from U to the in the sequence u . In fact , one can expect that , chosen large enough relative to the time scale of , then the effect of u for be negligible and the the will approach that , if the infinite horizon measure of were to be directly which , for the above , is impractical . This asymptotic behaviour been experimentally confirmed , see . In summary , the prediction designer to trade off performance versus on line computational effort . Interestingly enough , excellent performance can often be with relatively small see , e .., , thus rendering the scheme quite easy to implement in practical . Another advantage of the when to the converter in that the can be designed to ensure stability like of the , see . Given that digital signal have to interact with the real , physical world , the design of a quantization scheme should take into account the sampling continuous to discrete time and reconstruction discrete to continuous time between which it is to be inserted there only partial understanding of how sampling reconstruction interact with a given quantization method in of the resulting , overall reconstruction error . Furthermore , most literature the performance of in of how close the input are by the output and not by the , continuous time underlying signal entering the system against the , continuous time reconstructed signal that comes out of the reconstruction stage of the system . Accordingly , performance is most often measured by the norm of the sample approximation error , see . Similarly , traditional works on sampling and reconstruction theory build their analysis based first upon ideal later the effect of quantization as the corruption of ideal by white additive noise . Although it been shown that this model of quantization is indeed accurate for small quantization and input whose certain rather weak , it is certainly not accurate , for example , when quantization are large , or when feedback are . As in and , it is often the case that quantization noise is deliberately made non white by the so as to minimize a frequency weighted measure of the reconstruction error . Within the setup in Fig . , we aim to present in this section some and additional insight related to the joint problem of designing that make use of the filtering , sampling , quantization and reconstruction paradigm . The model of the sampling and reconstruction process in Section to a somewhat trivial but nevertheless important result : it for a decomposition of the final reconstruction between the input a and the output a see Fig . of a sampling quantization reconstruction system into two . The first term to the error due to the mismatch , i . e ., the non coincidence of input and . The second comes deviation of the discrete time both linear and non linear from the optimal between input and output in the sampling and reconstruction , respectively . The following proposition this idea : Proposition . Let L be the impulse response of the reconstruction filter , such that is frame , and the sampling interval . Then , the mean square reconstruction error between any input signal a L and an by the reconstruction stage can always be decomposed as Since a a , and because , we have that a , see , and . Corollary . From Proposition , it that for any a L , choice of quantization scheme and or discrete time , the continuous time reconstruction error is lower bounded by We emphasize that the lower bound in to the minimum continuous time error attainable by any discrete time scheme , once the output space is given , even if and no quantization is applied to the . From Proposition , it is clear that the performance of discrete time e .., discrete time filtering and quantization should be in of the second term of the right hand side of , that is , the L norm of a a . In relation to the design of , this rise to the question of what information is by a generalized scalar to minimize a . We have this question in . A summary of the analysis and therein is below . As noted above , the reduction of the continuous time by discrete time place by the second term on the right hand side of . For the general system under study see Fig . , the signal to be is actually a with L , the impulse response of : as the impulse response of , the approximation of a by the system becomes see , Fig . . The impulse response reconstruction frame , which the reconstruction space As in Section . , the generation of the optimal output a can be accomplished by the frame operator associated with to the sequence of , i . e . where is the analysis operator associated to , the canonical dual frame of see Definition in the Appendix . We will denote this optimal , un sequence of by It is clear from the above that any quantization algorithm that to minimize the continuous time error needs to be able , in the first place , to obtain the target sequence u in . From the in Section . , this that the first necessary condition for the feasibility of optimal quantization is that sampling and reconstruction be for orthogonal reconstruction . If we now suppose that the access to u , then the problem of optimal quantization is that of choosing the optimal sequence u , defined as The solution to one to solve a continuous time optimization problem with discrete time , decision . It is shown in that this can be converted into an equivalent discrete time optimization problem . More precisely , The operator is by the Gram matrix see , sec . . of the reconstruction frame , which is defined element wise as where u and u are the vector of the u and u , respectively . Figure : The sampling , quantization and reconstruction system from Fig . . Impulse and frame The direct is that a can determine the optimal output sequence without full knowledge of the inter sample behaviour of the impulse of the reconstruction filter . Indeed , quantization performance can be measured by the weighted norm implicitly defined in . Note that the design of an optimal is not possible without knowledge of the matrix . are shown for each filter . In general , minimization of would require one to evaluate it for every sequence u , u U , that can be by the . This optimization , however , becomes intractable for sufficiently long . Given the similarity of and , one can use the in Section and optimize over a short moving horizon of . can be found in , , where a step optimal converter is . Preliminary show that , interestingly , significant distortion reduction is even when converting non band limited . Indeed , since the focus is on the reduction of the total continuous time reconstruction error , if the sampling rate is lower than the rate , the resultant converter will attempt to reduce not only quantization noise , but also noise . Furthermore , as the horizon is made , the output of the converter the optimal feasible output sequence , defined in . In previous of this work we have that the power of feedback can be used in the design of . In particular , we have shown in and that careful deployment of of Model Predictive Control may lead to high performance conversion . The purpose of the present section is to highlight the role by sampling and especially quantization in feedback control . Efficiency in data a central role in any control system where parsimony need to be taken into account . Thus , quantization and sampling are worth investigating , for example , in the following : • when need to be over a digital network , i . e ., in Control , , ; • when plant need to be e .., relay feedback , on off control , digital control , or also due to the presence of a human operator ; • in large scale , such as those related to mining and supply chain management . In the following , we will briefly describe how surrounding sampling and quantization translate into the design of these of control . Sampling and Reconstruction In the design of a sampling reconstruction scheme for a control system , traditional reconstruction criteria should be with more appropriate . Indeed , reconstruction quality is only of secondary importance . The main objective is measured at the plant output . In particular , as shown in , for , open loop performance should be by closed loop . This can be through consideration of frequency weighted such as . Quantization Interestingly , the noise shaping in can also be applied to control where are ; see , e .., . For example , when on the design of for with , a key point in realizing that the AD conversion scheme of Fig . is related to a control system with plant : The plant input u is to be chosen such that the plant output Ha the reference signal Ha . Thus , performance can be measured via the frequency weighted error signal eH , see and also . on how to apply of Moving Horizon to can be found , for example , in . It is interesting to note that the framework can also be to incorporate dynamic into . The resultant methodology can be as sampling and quantization on demand and is , thus , highly efficient from a data representation perspective , see . This paper basic and related to the process of sampling , quantization and reconstruction of scalar . With the introduction of a frame theoretic viewpoint , three of sampling and reconstruction have been . We have several generalized scalar quantization , and have how control theory to signal theory . Furthermore , we have given into the joint problem of sampling , quantization and reconstruction , and have outlined how these interact . Finally , we have the role by sampling and quantization in control . Definition Space . a vector space with an inner the induced norm . If such a space is complete under its norm then it is a Space . Definition Basis . A sequence of ,, in a a a basis and only if span and there exist two such that • The in are orthogonal if and only if and only if . • The lower bound in is equivalent to saying that is a set of linearly independent . • The higher bound in that will be bounded for any choice of . a space , then the best approximation in in the sense of the norm of given by the orthogonal projection , by , and defined as the operator The orthogonal projection from a the null space of : If , is an basis of , then the orthogonal projection operator can be explicitly written as Orthogonal projection elegant to some otherwise complex optimization in functional analysis . This and a natural framework for the problem of efficient sampling and quantization . A fundamental property of and is that they are able to define a precise form of equivalence between two different . It is isomorphism : two different are isomorphic if they have the same dimension . An isomorphism is indeed any linear invertible operator from one space onto the other . Of particular interest for our analysis are the between any separable space L function space of dimension , where , and space . Such an isomorphism can be stated by considering any basis of , namely , and the associated analysis operator The analysis operator defined in is an unitary isomorphism . This that the respective in through of any group of their respective and relative , i . e . This remarkable property of isomorphic one to study the relation between of a space by looking at their through in another , more convenient space . Actually , one can argue that all digital signal digital control is made possible the existence of signal and of . Some of the basic of of and bases so far will be by the following simple example . the space of all real valued satisfying the following : • The of are constant over any of the open , , , , . Figure : Example of a functional space , an base and a unitary analysis operator . a w , w and w belong to the space ; The , constitute an for ; Image of the w , w and w in R through the analysis operator . becomes a space . The inner product also a norm in , given by It is easy to show a two dimensional space . This can be intuitively by that any completely determined by exactly two , such as , for example , the of the t . A basis for a space of dimension two two . Figure . a pair of , form an basis for . Figure . the of w , w , w , and through the analysis operator see in R . As , the of the and are in R . How close is w to w in their norm . Since the analysis operator is a unitary isomorphism R , we have , from Consider now the case of a function ,, that to a space L , such that Wand . Figure : a onto . a Function to . Relative between , , an isomorphic space . The and relative respect to an orthogonal basis as are shown in the dimensional representation of Fig . .. Here it can be seen a non zero orthogonal projection onto . This orthogonal projection is the vector , in accordance with , and is given by . Consequently , the best approximation in an L sense , expressed as a function of time Despite the computational convenience of bases , one often needs to study by a set of linearly dependent over complete basis . The concept of , by and , one to analyze such . with over complete bases arise in practice not only by chance . It been shown that the redundancy of is beneficial , for it can reduce the effect of in the expansion , see . The formal definition of a frame is given next . Definition Frame . A sequence of in a a frame there exist A , such that The number A and satisfy are frame . Some important about are as : is a frame for a space , then k . • A frame is said to be tight if one can choose A as frame . If A , it is a frame . • If a frame to be a frame when an arbitrary element is removed , it is an exact frame . An exact frame is equivalent to a basis . • If the of a frame are linearly independent then A see . The redundancy of a frame with for a defined as the ratio It is easy to show that , for a tight frame , A , where A is the lower frame bound in . Another important property of the of a frame is that they are also a sequence , i . e ., they From remark and the above , orthogonal bases are a special type of basis , whilst bases are exact . Thus , by our analysis on , one is also orthogonal and bases as special . Definition Synthesis Operator . The synthesis or operator for a frame is defined as , the synthesis operator for a frame with frame A , is bounded , with operator norm , i . e ., is the minimum constant such that . Definition Analysis Operator . The analysis operator for a frame is defined as Definition Dual Frame . Let be a frame for a space . Another frame for , namely , that As can be seen in , a dual frame an explicit method for any of , from be exactly through the synthesis frame . Definition Frame Operator . The frame operator of a frame is defined as Lemma from , Lemma . . . Let be a frame with frame frame A ,. Then the following : The frame operator defined in is of particular importance for the problem of sampling and reconstruction , since it an explicit way to obtain a dual frame see . More precisely , defined in , if is a frame for , then the frame is a dual frame for in , i . e . The frame is the canonical dual frame of in . This is a reciprocal relation , i . e ., If the frame in were by additive noise e ,, then the reconstruction formula would yield a reconstruction error Early the fact that the the frame the reconstruction error were provided in , whilst can be found in and . Due to the importance of this property of redundant , we present next an adaptation of the result in , which is also illustrative of the importance of the frame . Proposition . Let be a frame of unit norm with frame A and let e , be a sequence of independent random with mean zero and variance s . Then the mean square value of we in Proof . If e , is a sequence of independent random with mean zero and variance , we have because is a frame . Combining with the result . ﻿ Abstract We prove of the recently quadratic rate distortion function subject to the constraint that the distortion is uncorrelated to the source . This result is based on shaped lattice quantization in the limit as the lattice dimension to infinity and for all positive . It turns out that this uncorrelated distortion can be causally . This feature , which in contrast to , is by causal transform . Moreover , we prove that by feedback noise shaping the uncorrelated distortion can be causally and with memoryless entropy . Whilst upon infinite dimensional , we prove that the rate loss in the finite dimensional case can be upper bounded by the space filling loss of the and , thus , is at most . bit dimension . rate distortion function for a stationary zero mean memory and under the fidelity criterion can be written in a parametric form the reverse water filling solution a b where the power spectral density the distortion is given , if c , otherwise . The water level is chosen such that the distortion constraint b is satisfied . It is well known that in order to achieve in the quadratic case , the distortion must be independent of the output . This clearly that the distortion must be correlated to the source . Interestingly , many well known source actually lead , by construction , to source uncorrelated . In particular , this is the case when the source coder the following two : a The linear if any achieve perfect reconstruction in the absence of quantization ; the quantization error is uncorrelated to the source . The first condition is typically satisfied by , transform and feedback . The second condition is met when subtractive and often when non subtractive dither are employed . Thus , any scheme , for example , quantization , to source uncorrelated . An important fundamental question , which was raised by the in a recent paper , is : What is the impact on rate distortion function , when we further impose the constraint that the end to end distortion must be uncorrelated to the input In , we the notion of , which is the quadratic rate distortion function subject to the constraint that the distortion is uncorrelated to the input . For a source , we defined as N , N where the notation the covariance matrix to the determinant . For zero mean stationary , we in that the above minimum in the limit when the following : is the of the optimal distortion , which needs to be . Notice that here the parameter a akin to in does not represent a water level . Indeed , white , the of the optimal distortion for is not white , for all . In the present paper we prove of by based on lattice quantization , which , in the limit as the dimension infinity , are able to achieve for any positive . We also show that can be causally , i . e ., that for all and for all positive one can build forward test that realize without non causal . This is contrary to the case of rate distortion function , where at least one of the Other and between and are in . of the forward test channel that needs to be non causal . To further illustrate the causality of , we present a causal transform architecture that it . We also show that the use of feedback noise shaping one to achieve with memoryless entropy . This a recent result by , and for . We conclude the paper by showing that , in all the , the rate loss with respect to when a finite dimensional can be upper bounded by the space filling loss of the . Thus , for any source with memory , by and scalar quantization , the scalar entropy conditioned to the dither of the output by at most . bit dimension . A lattice is a lattice with subtractive dither , by entropy . The dither U V is uniformly distributed over a cell V of the lattice . Due to the dither , the quantization error is truly independent of the input . Furthermore , it was shown in that the rate of the , i . e . can be written as the mutual information between the input and the output of an additive noise channel E , where E the channel additive noise and is distributed as . More precisely , N I ; N I ; E and the quadratic distortion per dimension is given by N N EkE k . It furthermore been shown that when is white there a sequence of lattice where the quantization error and therefore also the dither to be approximately distributed in the divergence sense for large . Specifically , let E have a probability distribution fE , and let be distributed with the same mean and covariance as E . Then limN N fE e e with a convergence rate of log if the sequence is chosen appropriately . In the next section we will be interested in the case where the dither is not necessarily white . By shaping the of a lattice whose dither is white , we also shape , a colored dither . This situation was considered in detail in from where we obtain the following lemma which was proven in but not put into a lemma . Lemma : Let E U V be white , i . e . E is uniformly distributed over the cell V of the lattice the shaped cell some invertible linear transformation . Denote the covariance of E by . Similarly , let , KEG covariance matrix KEG and let Proof : The divergence is invariant to invertible since E E log . The forward channel that is shown in Fig . . According to , all that is for the mutual information per dimension equal is with equal to the right hand side of b . In view of the asymptotic of lattice in Section , the of can be shown by the test channel of Fig . by an adequately shaped dimensional lattice and then . In order to establish this result , Lemma : Let ,, and be mutually independent random . Let and be arbitrarily distributed , and the same mean and covariance as and , respectively . Then Theorem : For a an infinite length random vector with zero mean , is achievable . Proof : Let be the sub vector the . For a fixed distortion , the average mutual information per dimension N I ; is when and are jointly and see . Let the dimensional shaped such that the dither is distributed as , with . It that the rate of the is given by N I ; E . The rate loss due to to quantize is given by where is the of the random vector , independent of E and , and the same first and second order statistics as E . In , inequality a directly from Lemma , since the use of subtractive dither the error E independent of . To complete the proof , we invoke Lemma , which that the of as . Remark : For zero mean stationary random , is by Theorem to be the complete input process . For this case , as shown in , the transform of the function of to the of b . For vector , the of by Theorem from the concatenation of infinitely many consecutive . Note that if one an infinite number of parallel scalar random , can be causally by Theorem from the th sample of each of the and entropy after . The fact that can be causally is further in the following section . We will next show that for a random vector with positive definite covariance matrix , can be by causal transform , . A typical transform architecture is shown in Fig . . In this figure , is , a vector , independent of , with covariance matrix I . The system clearly the perfect reconstruction condition W . The reconstruction error is the random vector ,, and the is N , be lower triangular , the transform coder in Fig . becomes causal , in the sense that ,..,, the th of U and can be determined just the the th element of . Since is lower triangular , is the decomposition of , which always . Thus , can be by causal transform . In practice , transform are by the vector channel by a or several by entropy . The latter process is simplified if the are independent . When with subtractive dither , this can be shown to be equivalent to N I U ; in the transform coder when the channel . Notice that , is invertible , the mutual information per dimension is also equal to . By the chain rule of mutual information we have with equality the of are mutually independent . If is , this is equivalent to being diagonal . Clearly , this cannot be with the architecture shown in Fig . causal matrices while at the same time satisfying . However , it can be by error feedback , as we show next . Consider the scheme shown in Fig . , where A is lower triangular and is strictly lower triangular . Again , a sufficient and necessary condition to have for some diagonal positive . If we substitute the factorization into , we obtain I I , and thus Thus , there exist A and . Substitution of into A AT , and log log A log . From and the fact that I it that A , and therefore We have seen that the use of error feedback one to make the average scalar mutual information between the input and output of each channel in the transform domain equal to . In the following section we show how this result can be extended to stationary . In this section we show that , for any colored stationary stationary source and for any positive distortion , can be by noise shaping , and that is achievable memory less entropy . The fact that can be by the additive colored noise test channel of Fig . that could also be by an additive white noise channel in a noise shaping feedback loop , see Fig . . In this figure , is a stationary process with . The A and are . The channel is situated , where white noise , independent of , is added . The reconstructed by passing through the filter A , yielding the reconstruction error . Fig . : Test channel built by the channel in a noise feedback loop . The following theorem that , for this scheme , the scalar mutual information across the channel can actually equal . Theorem : Consider the scheme in Fig . . Let , be independent stationary random . Suppose that the differential entropy rate of is bounded , and that is white . Then , for every , there exist causal and stable A , A and such that Proof : Consider all possible of the A and such that the sequence is white , i . e ., such that . From Fig . , this is On the other hand , since is , a necessary and sufficient condition in order to achieve is that are bounded and positive for all ,, and that a bounded differential entropy rate of that . From the Wiener criterion see also , e .., , this that , A and A can be chosen to be stable and causal . Furthermore , recall that for any fixed , the corresponding value of a is unique see , and thus fixed . Since the variance is also fixed , it that each frequency response magnitude that a can be associated to a unique value of . Since is strictly causal and stable , the minimum value of the variance is when i . e ., if no outside the unit circle equivalently , if is minimum phase , see , e .., . If we choose in a a filter that , and then we take the logarithm and integrate both sides of a , we obtain where a from the of and , and from the fact that is independent of strictly causal . This the proof . Alternatively , In a , equality is the right hand side of a , i . e ., optimal . Equality because , which from b . The fact that is stationary been used in , wherein equality is is minimum phase , i . e ., if . Equality in if an only if the of are independent , which , from the of , is equivalent to . Finally , e from the fact that is independent of . Notice that the key to the proof of Theorem on knowing a the of the end to end distortion to realize . Indeed , one could also use this fact to realize by the in a feedback loop , and then following a reasoning similar to that in . In order to achieve by a instead of an channel , one would require the quantization to be . This cannot be with scalar . However , as we have seen in , lattice are able to yield quantization approximately as the lattice dimension to infinity . The sequential causal nature of the feedback architecture does not immediately allow for the possibility of vector . However , if several are to be simultaneously , we can overcome this difficulty by an idea in where the are in parallel by separate feedback . The feedback are operating independently of each other except that their scalar are by a single vector . If the number of parallel is large , then the vector that the marginal of the individual of the becomes approximately distributed . Thus , due to the within the vector , each feedback a sequence of i . i .. quantization . Furthermore , the effective rate per source is that of a high dimensional entropy constrained per dimension . ﻿ We present several novel and the mutual information and the directed information in with feedback . The internal within such are restricted only to be causal , but are to be non linear , stochastic and time . Moreover , the involved can be arbitrarily distributed . We bound the directed information between inside the feedback loop by the mutual information between inside and outside the feedback loop . This fundamental result an interesting interpretation as a law of conservation of information flow . Building upon it , we derive several novel and , which allow us to prove some information under less restrictive . Finally , we establish new between directed inside a feedback loop . This a new and general data The notion of directed information by in the amount of information that causally from a given random and ordered sequence to another . For this reason , it increasingly found use in diverse , from the capacity of with feedback , the rate distortion function under causality , some of the fundamental in control , causal in neural , to portfolio theory and hypothesis testing , to name a few . The directed information from a random sequence to a random sequence is defined as where the notation xi the sequence , ,..., i . The causality inherent in this definition becomes evident when it with the mutual information between and , given by sequence present in i , given the past . By contrast , in the conditional mutual in the sum of , only the past and current of are considered , that is , xi . Thus , I the amount of information causally from to . There exist several the relationship between I and I ; . First , it is well known that I I ; , with equality if and only if is causally related to . A conservation law of mutual and directed information been found in , which that I I I ; , where the concatenation , ,.. . Given its prominence in feedback , it is perhaps in these where the directed information becomes most important . For instance , the directed information been instrumental in the capacity of with feedback see , e .., , , and the therein , as well as the rate distortion function in feedback , , . In this paper , our focus is on the and directed and mutual within feedback , as well as between directed different within the corresponding feedback loop . In order to discuss some of the related to this problem , it is convenient to consider the general feedback system shown in Fig . a . In this diagram , the S ,..., S represent possibly non linear and time causal such that the total delay of the loop is at least one sample . In the same figure ,,,, are exogenous random , or , which could represent , for example , any combination of random initial or side . We note that any of these exogenous , in combination with its corresponding deterministic Si , can also yield any desired stochastic causal . For the simple case in which all the Si i are linear time invariant and stable , and assuming ,, , it was shown in that I does not depend on whether there is feedback from e to u or not . between mutual and directed in a less restricted setup , shown in Fig . , have been found in , . In that setting a system , is a strictly causal dynamic system vector state sequence , with x , being the random initial state in its state space representation . The external signal which could correspond to a disturbance is statistically independent of , the latter corresponding to , for example , side information or channel noise . Both are also statistically independent of x . The E , Figure . a : The general system considered in this work . : A special case , corresponding to the closed loop system studied in . to an , a and a channel , respectively , all of which are causal . The to in a possibly time manner , i . e ., . Similarly , the concatenation of the , the channel and the , and to u as a possibly time dependent function u . Under these , the following fundamental result was shown in , Lemma . : By further assuming in that Fig . is deterministic , the following chain naturally , which is found in the proof of , Corollary . . The deterministic nature of crucial role in the proof of this result , since otherwise the chain does not hold , in general , due to the feedback from u to . Notice that both and provide lower to the difference between two mutual , each of them a signal external to the loop such as x , to a signal internal to the loop such which for the system in Fig . a and in , Theorem and later in , Lemma . . , the directed information between two internal and the mutual information between the second of these and an external sequence . A related bound , similar to but information and with the leftmost mutual information by the directed information from to which are two internal to the loop , been in , Lemma . : . This result on three : a that the memory less and a conditional invertibility property , a finite memory condition , and a fading memory condition , these two related to the see Fig . . It is worth that , as defined in , these the use of side information by the and or the possibility affected by random noise or a random internal state which is non observable please see for a detailed description of these . The inequality recently been extended in , Theorem , for the case of discrete valued random and assuming ,,, as the following identity written in of the and setup shown in Fig . a : in Fig . a and with the additional assumption that , , it was also shown in , Theorem that for the in which u i i i i . e ., when the concatenation of S and S to a node . In , and play important in the capacity of with noisy feedback . To the best of our knowledge , , , , and are the only available in the literature which lower bound the difference between an internal to internal directed information and an external mutual information . There exist even in relation to between two directed only internal to the loop . To the best of our knowledge , the only inequality of this type in the literature is the one found in the proof of Theorem . of . The latter the form of a quasi data inequality for directed in closed loop , and that provided , and if S is such that is a function of i . e ., if S is conditionally invertible i . In , to the causally conditioned directed information defined in . Inequality a crucial role , since it lower bounding the average data rate across a digital error free channel by a directed information . In , to a random dither signal in an entropy In this paper , we derive a set of information and of internal or external to the loop in feedback . The first of these is an identity which , under an independence condition , can be as a law of conservation of information . The latter identity is the starting point for most of the which follow it . Among other , we extend and to the general setup in Fig . a , where none of the made in except causality needs to hold . Moreover , we will prove the validity of without assuming the conditional invertibility of S nor that ,. The latter result is one of four novel data derived in Section , each two directed valid for the system in Fig . a . The last of these is a complete closed loop counterpart of the traditional open loop inequality . The remainder of this paper with a description of the under study and the extension of directed information to the case in which each of the in the loop may introduce an arbitrary , non negative delay i . e ., we do not allow for anticipation . The information and are in Section . For clarity of the exposition , all the are deferred to Section . A brief discussion of potential of our is in Section , which is by the in Section . We begin by providing a formal description of the S ... S in Fig . a . Their are given by the possibly deterministic e i S d i a i S d i , pi , b i S xi d i , si , c u i S d i d where ,,, are exogenous random and the possibly time d , d , d , d , ,... are such that That is , the concatenation of S ,..., S a delay of at least one sample . For every i ,...,, i i , i . e ., i is a real random vector whose dimension is given by some function : ,.. . As stated in , the directed information as defined in is a more meaningful measure of the flow of information between and than the conventional mutual information I ; discrete valued , input and output , respectively , of a forward channel , and if there strictly causal , perfect feedback , so that i i a scenario in as part of an argument in favor of the directed information , then the mutual information becomes I ; . Thus , when strictly causal feedback is present , I ; to account for how much information about been to through the forward channel that between them . It is important to note that , in as well as in many works concerned with , the forward channel is instantaneous , i . e ., it no delay . Therefore , if a feedback channel is , then this feedback channel must have a delay of at least one sample , as in the example above . However , when the system in Fig . a , we may need to evaluate the directed information between and which are , respectively , input and output of a strictly casual forward channel i . e ., with a delay of at least one sample , whose output is instantaneously fed back to its input . In such case , if one further perfect feedback and i i , then , in the same spirit as before , As one can see , definition of directed information to be meaningful if instantaneous feedback is . It is natural to solve this problem by that , in the latter example , the forward channel had a delay , say , greater than one sample . Therefore , if we are interested in measuring how much of the information in , not present in , was from xi through the forward channel , we should look at the mutual information I i ; xi , because only the input xi can have an influence on i . For this reason , we introduce the following , notion of directed information Definition Directed Information with Forward Delay : In this paper , the directed information from to through a forward channel with a non negative time delay of i is defined as For a zero delay forward channel , the latter definition with . Likewise , we adapt the definition of causally conditioned directed information to the definition Before finishing this section , it is convenient to recall the following identity a particular case of the chain rule of conditional mutual information , which will be extensively in the of our : We begin by a fundamental result , which the directed information between two within a feedback loop , , to the mutual information between an external set of and : This fundamental result , which for the in which ,, can be understood as a law of conservation of information flow , is in Fig . . For such , the information causally information flow from ,, to . When ,, are not independent of , part of the mutual information between ,, and corresponding to the term can be thought of as being through , thus the forward link . This an intuitive interpretation for . Figure . The flow of information between exogenous ,, and the internal directed information from to when ,,. Remark : Theorem that I is only a part of or at most equal to the information flow between all the exogenous entering the loop outside the link namely ,,, and . In particular , if ,, were deterministic , then I , regardless of the S ,..., S Remark : By ,. Then , Theorem , we recover , whenever ,,. Thus , , Theorem and , Lemma . . can be as The following result an inequality I with the separate of information Theorem that , provided ,, , I is lower bounded by the sum of the individual from all the in any given partition of , to , provided these are mutually independent . Indeed , both and can be generalized for any appropriate choice of external and internal . More precisely , the set of all external in a feedback system . Let a and be two internal in the loop . Define Ta , as the set of exogenous which are to the loop at every subsystem Si that in the path going from a to . Thus , for any Ta if Ta , Ta we have that and become To finish this section , we present a , non asymptotic version of inequality : Theorem : In the system shown in Fig . a , if ,,, are mutually independent , then As , Theorem can be seen as an extension of to the more general setup shown in Fig . a , where the made in , Lemma . do not need to hold . In particular , x in Fig . correspond to S and in Fig . a , respectively , we see that inequality even E have dependent initial , or if the internal state not observable . Theorem also an interpretation in of information . This can be in the diagram shown in Fig . , which the individual full turn around the entire feedback loop stemming from , and . Theorem that the sum of these individual is a lower bound for the directed information , provided ,,, are independent . Figure . A representation of the three first information on the right hand side of . This section three closed loop of the data inequality two directed , both between of internal to the loop . As already in Section I , to the best of our knowledge , the first inequality of this type to appear in the literature is the one in Theorem . in see . Recall that the latter result stated that I I , S to be such that is a deterministic function of and that ,. The following result another inequality which also two directed , namely , I and I , but only that ,,. Notice that Theorem does not be independent . This may seem counter intuitive upon loop between the link from e to . The following theorem is an identity between two directed only internal . It can also be seen as a complement to Theorem , since it can be directly applied to establish the relationship between I and I . Notice that , by additional independence upon the exogenous specifically ,, Theorem and , in particular , which the inequality in , Theorem . stated above in . More precisely , does not require one of the directed and irrespective of the invertibility of the in the loop . A closer counterpart of i . e ., of , Theorem . , I , is next . Thus , provided , ,, that regardless of the invertibility of S , instead that , for all i ,...,, any statistical dependence between and si only in i . e ., that chain . The derived so far relate directed either the same starting sequence or the same destination sequence . We finish this section with the following corollary , which directly by combining and and directed four different internal to the loop . Corollary Full Closed Loop Directed Data Inequality : For the system shown in Fig . Equality in a if , in addition , i . e ., if ,,, are mutually independent . To the best of our knowledge , Corollary is the first result available in the literature providing a lower bound to the gap between two directed , four different inside the feedback loop . This result can be seen as the first full extension of the open loop traditional inequality , to arbitrary closed loop . Notice that there is no need to consider with more than four , since all external entering the loop between a given pair of internal can be as exogenous to a single equivalent deterministic . Proof of Theorem : It is clear from Fig . a and from that the relationship between ,,,, be by the diagram shown in Fig . . From this diagram and Lemma in the appendix it that independent of ,,, then the following chain : Figure . Representation of the system of Fig . the dependency between ,,,, and . The dependency on i of the d i ,..., d i is for clarity . In the above , a from the fact that , if is known , then xi d i is a deterministic function of i . The resulting on the right hand side of a correspond to I I , and thereby proving the first part of the theorem , i . e ., the equality in . In turn , from the non negativity of mutual , turning into equality if ,,, as a direct consequence of the chain in . Finally , equality in if ,,, upon . This that equality in is if ,,, the proof . Proof of Theorem : Apply the chain rule identity to the of to obtain where the second equality since . The result then directly by combining with and . where a is due to Theorem , from Theorem and the fact that , , and from the chain rule of mutual information . For the second term on the of the last equation , we have where a since , , and e stem from the chain rule of mutual information , and is a consequence of the chain e which is due to the fact that S d Finally , is due to the chain , which because ,, as a consequence of Lemma in the appendix see also Fig . a . Substitution of into , thereby the proof . Proof of Theorem : Since ,, , we can apply where now , the role of , and obtain where a from Theorem , which also that equality is if and only if ,, . In turn , is due to the fact that is a deterministic function of . Equality if and only if , . Finally , from Lemma in the appendix , turns into equality if ,,. Substitution of into , the proof . Proof of Theorem : We begin with the second part of the theorem , proving the validity of the equality † in . We have the following : where equality in a if and only if the chain si , pi for all i ,.. as a straightforward extension of Lemma . In our case , the latter chain since we are assuming , In turn , from the fact that , for all i ,.., xi d i is a function of , pi . To prove , we resort to and write From the of the in , it can be seen that , given , the triad of random is a deterministic function of at most . that and that see , it readily that , and thus each of the mutual on the right hand side of is zero . To verify the validity of , we use and obtain last term in this chain of was shown to be zero in the proof of . Equality in e if and only if , a chain which is satisfied in our case from the fact that , , and from Lemma . Finally , since , we have that the chain of from to , from which we conclude that this result into and Theorem we arrive at equality † in . To prove the first equality the , it to notice that I to the sum on the right hand side of , from where we proceed as with the first part . This the proof of the theorem . Information and , in particular , the data inequality , have a fundamental role in Information Theory and its . It is perhaps the lack of a similar body of associated with the directed information and with non asymptotic , causal information transmission which limited the extension of many important information theoretic and to feedback or causality , . Two such , already in this paper , are the understanding of the fundamental in control over noiseless digital , and causal rate distortion . In those , causality is of paramount relevance an thus the directed information , naturally , as the appropriate measure of information flow see , for example , , , , , and . We believe that our might help gaining into the fundamental trade underpinning those , and might also allow for the solution of open such as , for instance , the minimal average data rate that a given performance level an version of the latter paper , which extensively the derived here , is currently under preparation by the . On a different vein , directed mutual information a role akin to that of standard mutual information when channel feedback capacity see , e .., , and the therein . Our may also play a role in expanding the understanding of communication over used with feedback , particularly when in the analysis additional exogenous such as a random channel state , interference and , in general , any form of side information . Thus , we hope that the and in Section may help in extending such as dirty paper , , distributed source , , , , terminal , , and data encryption , to causal feedback . In this paper , we have derived fundamental between mutual and directed in general discrete time with feedback . The first of these is an inequality between the directed information between to inside the feedback loop and the mutual information a subset of all the exogenous incoming . The latter result can be as a law of conservation of information for closed loop . Crucial to these was the repeated use of chain for conditional mutual information as well as the development of new . The proof do not rely upon of or , and the hold in very general non linear , time and stochastic with arbitrarily distributed . Indeed , the only restriction is that all within the system must be causal , and that their combined delay must be at least one sample . A new generalized data inequality was also proved , which is valid for directed within the loop . A key insight to be from this inequality was that the further apart the are in the loop , the lower is the directed information between them . This closely the behavior of mutual information in open loop , where it is well known that any independent of the can only reduce their mutual information . Lemma : In the system shown in Fig . , the exogenous , are mutually independent and Figure . Two arbitrary causal S , S in a feedback loop . The exogenous , are mutually for every possible pair of the : S , and ﻿ This paper novel on the characterization of the the causal information function for arbitrarily distributed one sided stationary th order source . It is first shown that on the of the to the causal stated for two sided stationary do not apply to the commonly used family of asymptotic average single letter distortion criteria . Moreover , we show that , in general , a reconstruction sequence cannot be both jointly stationary with a one sided stationary source sequence and causally related to it . This that , in general , the causal for one sided stationary cannot be by a stationary distribution . However , we prove that for an arbitrarily distributed one sided stationary source and a large class of distortion criteria , the search for can be restricted to which yield the output sequence y jointly stationary with the source after . Finally , we improve the definition of the stationary causal previously by and for two sided stationary and show that for a two sided source ..., , , ,... for the associated one sided source , ,.... This that , for the quadratic case , the practical zero delay by for approaching achieve an operational data rate which by less than . log p e . per sample . The information Rit for a given one sided random source be defined as the of the mutual information rate , Section . between source and reconstruction y such that a given fidelity criterion does not exceed a distortion value . If one to this definition the restriction that the output can only depend causally upon the source , one what is known as the causal , , non anticipative or sequential . All these are equivalent and will be as , defined in where the is taken over all joint of y given x such that the causality which will be to as the short causality constraint hold and which yield distortion not greater than , for some fidelity criterion . Notice that , if one is given a two sided random source process x ..., , , ,... instead , and one is interested only in and the x , then the causality may be stated as as done in . This notion of causality will be to as the long causality constraint . The motivation for considering in this work one sided instead of two sided and thus instead of from the aim of building which operate with zero delay the same motivation behind the causality constraint . To see this , notice that the causality constraint for two sided to the situation in which source in the infinite past exist and are available to the . This may require an infinite delay before actually beginning to encode and decode . By contrast , the causality constraint the case when the source is a one sided process and only . It is important to highlight at this point that even though the causality condition can also be applied to a two sided source process , it would not ensure causality in that case . To see why , consider the situation in a binary i . i .. source where each the or with equal probability . Suppose y is built as , where the exclusive OR operator . It is easy to see that , even though y non causally on x . The above observation that if the source is two sided but only the x are and the process is one sided y , then one needs to impose instead the more general which . Besides causality , these guarantee that even if the source is a two sided process , its and reconstruction proceeds as if it were a one sided process . Notice that and . For this reason , will be to as the strong causality As we shall see in and , this situation , where at can take only as input , significant due to the unavoidable need to deal with transient phenomena . The operational significance of from its relation to the causal operational , as . The latter is defined as the of the average data which are achievable by a sequence of causal , yielding a distortion not greater than . is important because every zero delay source code suitable for such as low delay streaming or control , must be causal . An is said to be achievable if it the under the same , . As far as the are aware , the of not been yet , for any source and distortion measure , and thus the gap between and is unknown in general . However , it is known that , Section and for it is possible to construct causal with an operational data rate exceeding by less than approximately . sample . sample for zero delay , once the statistics which realize the latter are known . This the importance of the To the best of the knowledge , no closed form are known for , except when considering mean squared error distortion and for i . i .. or AR , either scalar , Section or vector valued . However , there exist various structural of the causal that have been found in literature when or is assumed to admit a stationary realization . Indeed , the of the of the causal a crucial role in the computation of for st order and distortion in . It also been a key implicit assumption in , and an explicit assumption in works such as and . In particular , for a stationary two sided random source , Definition the stationary causal where the is taken over all of y given x which yield a one sided reconstruction y jointly stationary with x , satisfying and an asymptotic average distortion constraint on . For the case of a source , it was shown in that an operational data rate exceeding by less than . log p e . sample was achievable a entropy uniform surrounded by linear time invariant operating in steady state . These illustrate the relevance of whether or in which the causal a stationary realization . To the best of our knowledge , the only work which given an answer to this question in a general framework is . Under a set of in Section below , it is shown in , Theorem that the search for the causal for a large class of two sided and distortion criteria can be restricted to which are jointly stationary with the source . Unfortunately , as we show in Section , the on the fidelity criteria in leave out some common such as the family of asymptotic average single letter fidelity criteria , and the statement of , Theorem an assumption whose validity to be proved . More importantly , the entire analysis of is built for two sided the causality constraint , which the question of whether its could apply to one sided as well , with the causality constraint . In this paper we give an answer to these and use the to prove some novel of the causal associated with the of its . Specifically , our main are the following : We show in Theorem that if a pair of one sided jointly stationary , with the latter depending causally on the former according to but otherwise arbitrarily distributed , then it must also satisfy the which is a fairly restrictive condition . In particular , as we show in Theorem , jointly and y causally upon x , then joint x is an i . i .. or st order process . This in stark contrast with what was shown in for two sided stationary and a of what is stated in , Theorem . . Despite the above , we show in Theorem that for any th order one sided stationary source x and a large class of distortion , the search for the causal as defined in can be restricted to output causally related to the source and jointly stationary with it after , and such that . We refer to such of as being quasi jointly stationary this notion is formally in Definition below . A consequence of this result is that for any th order stationary the corresponding one sided stationary source x . The relevance of this finding is that for stationary and asymptotic distortion , an operational data rate exceeding and thus by less than approximately . sample , when operating causally , and . bit sample , in zero delay operation , is achievable by a scalar as in . The remainder of this paper with Section , in which the leading to , Theorem are and the of that theorem are . In Section we prove that , in general , it is not possible to have two one sided which are jointly stationary and , at the same time , satisfy the causality constraint . Section our main theorem Theorem , which that the search for the causal for one sided th order stationary can be restricted to . Finally , main of this work . All are in section the Appendix , which also some technical by these . Notation : the real , the , is the set of natural positive , and N , , ,.... For every , the ceiling operator the integer not less than . We use non for scalar random For a random one sided process x we will sometimes use the short hand this meaning is clear from the context . When convenient , we write a random sequence , as the column vector , the so that the index goes above the one , thus the usual index order in a column vector . The entry on the th row and th column of a as ,, with being the sub matrix ,. For a random a given alphabet set , we write to denote a sigma algebra associated : , to denote its probability distribution or probability measure . We describe the fact same probability distribution as , state independent . We write the condition in which two random a , are independent given a third random chain notation a . a set of probability , then the set of all random whose probability distribution to . The expectation operator is as E . We write as a shorthand for . The mutual information between two is defined as , Lemma . where the is over , and ,, and , are the joint and marginal of and , respectively . If , have joint and marginal probability density ,, and , respectively , then The conditional mutual information I a ; is defined via the chain rule of mutual information I a ; , I a ;, I a ;. The mutual information rate between two x and y is defined as in . The variance of a real valued random as . The auto correlation function of a random process x is , , E , ,. The following of the mutual information any random a ,, will be and to throughout this work : Fact . Let a ,, be three random with an arbitrary joint distribution . Then , there a random element a equivalently , a joint distribution a ,, such that In order to assess whether or to what extent , Theorem could provide support to the made in , e .. , , , , it is necessary to take a closer look at the made in and the statement of its Theorem . For that purpose , the first part of this section is an exposition of the and leading to , Theorem . The second part is an analysis which the of , Theorem and its inapplicability to the case in which the source and reconstruction are one sided . At the same time , this section also and part of the notation to be in the remainder of this paper for convenience , a summary of these is in Table I below . Throughout , the search in the associated with various of i . e ., causal rate distortion is stated over of joint probability between source and reconstruction as opposed to the usual , in which the search is over conditional , see and , Chapter , . Since the distribution of the source is given , it is that for every k k , all the joint , to be considered same given distribution of the source for the corresponding block , say . This requirement can be as that , for a set of admissible joint where and are , respectively , the to which and belong . In , this admissibility requirement is in the definition of the of which meet the distortion constraint , next . The fidelity criterion for every pair of k k is expressed in as to belong to a non empty set of hereafter to as distortion feasible set , a condition written as . In this definition , the number an admissible distortion level . Notice that such general formulation of a fidelity criteria does not need a distortion function and does not necessarily involve an expectation . As above , the admissibility requirement is expressed in the in . . The latter equation can be written as We believe this re exposition of to be valuable in itself since on the one hand , it the minimal set of to formulate and understand its Theorem , and on the other hand , it an clearer presentation than the one found in an translation from , which is not easy to read due to its notation , some mathematical and the low resolution of its available form . The analysis in considered both discrete and continuous time , but here we only refer to the discrete time scenario . In . and . , the distortion feasible are assumed to satisfy the concatenation condition With this , . defined the epsilon entropy of the set of as where the is taken over all of random such that the causality are satisfied . Then . the message generation rate as when the limit . An alternative message generation rate is also considered in by the set of distortion admissible process as : Definition . The set of all two sided random process x , y for which there exist k k such that and when the limit , where the is taken over all of satisfying the causality Notice that these imply and differ from the latter in that here the reconstruction y is a two sided random process . Now assume that Xi and , for all i , for . Define , for any given non negative sequence such that , the distribution , E a , E , k k , E k k k k . The actual term employed in is epsilon entropy of the message where the term message to the random in . Then , the analysis of the lower bound in can be confined to jointly stationary of random For convenience , Table I a summary of the and notation so far , together with some which will be defined in the following . We now discuss three of Theorem which are relevant when trying to establish whether the causal of a one sided stationary source a stationary realization . Limitation : The first obvious limitation is that even if source and reconstruction are , every distortion criterion which only their positive time part cannot be expressed by a distortion feasible set given by Definition if the , satisfy condition in Theorem . To see this , notice that if , then such distortion criterion which non positive times would require , to admit all joint probability satisfying . Combining this with condition in Theorem that every set , , with , which to imposing no restriction on the distortion at all . It is natural to think that such elemental shortcoming could be by simply condition in Theorem by a one sided version of the form : For every t ,, t such that t t : , t and , t are identical . Leaving aside the fact that this alternative condition is not sufficient for Theorem to hold , it is worth pointing out that , the commonly family of asymptotic single letter fidelity Distortion feasible set . The set of all joint which satisfy a given constraint given by see before Generic distortion feasible set of probability for of one sided , , ,... The set of all joint of of one sided random , , ,... and The of causally related one sided of see Definition . C The set of one sided of causally related according constraint see Definition . to the short causality The set of causal for of the form the long causality constraint see Definition Such satisfy criteria can not be expressed by a distortion feasible set given by Definition , as the following lemma its proof can be found in Appendix A . Lemma . Let be any given distortion functional which as argument a joint distribution , and a non negative real value . Let AD be the set of all of stationary , with pair wise , which satisfy the asymptotic Then , there exist an infinite collection of distortion feasible , k k k satisfy ing such that the associated given by Definition AD . Limitation : The second limitation associated with Theorem is that its application one to prove its condition , i . e ., the unproven supposition that The only work we are aware of which upon Theorem is , and , accordingly , , Theorem . , which that a similar equality . Unfortunately , as shown in , the proof of , Theorem . is flawed . We note that Lemma in Section A below two alternative sufficient for an equality similar to but for one sided to hold . Limitation : The third limitation of Theorem for its applicability to one sided is the fact that the entire framework built in is stated for two sided and , crucially , for the corresponding causality restriction given by chain . This difference cannot be simply while Theorem to remain valid . Indeed , as we show in the next section Theorem , a pair of random can be jointly stationary and at the same time satisfy the causality chain only if is independent is given . Moreover , we prove that joint and causality are incompatible when the source is a th order one sided process with . In this section we address the question of whether there a one sided reconstruction process y jointly stationary with a source x and which also the causality constraint . Each source random sample i to some given set source alphabet and is to have an arbitrary distribution . Recall that a random process , the reconstruction alphabet and Y ,, is said to be jointly stationary with x if and only if , for every , the distribution of does not depend on , for , ,.... The next theorem that , for such one sided , joint and causality may hold together only if is independent of when is given . Theorem . If x and y are jointly stationary and y is causally related to x according to , then Proof . If does not hold for if y and x are jointly stationary , not hold , which to not satisfying for , the proof . To illustrate how restrictive condition is , the next theorem that , for a th order stationary source x , causality and joint is possible only if x is i . i .. or . Recall that a random vector or scalar valued process th order if is the non negative integer such that Theorem . Suppose x is a zero mean stationary process , and assume that , for some Proof . Since and yN are jointly and the latter causally upon the former , it that for some lower triangular matrix A ai ,, A i ,, i , ,...,. On the other hand , the fact that and yN are jointly stationary that and are matrices . From , considering the on the first and second of and a , a , a , a , a , . a , , Therefore , , ,..., , which for a stationary sequence that E . For random the latter is equivalent to the , which a st order process if or an i . i .. process if . This the proof . In the next section we will see that if x is th order , then it is possible to build a pair causally related according to such that x , y is stationary . Moreover , we will show in Theorem below that the minimization associated with the causal can be restricted to such . In this section we show that for any th order one sided stationary source x the search for the causal as defined in and for a large class of distortion criteria can be restricted to output y causally related to the source , jointly stationary with it after , and such Definition Set of quasi jointly stationary process . The set of is composed of all joint , y of of one sided random which satisfy Notice that Q to the set of joint associated with all jointly stationary one sided process . One can define a distortion feasible set for of one sided , say , from the finite length distortion feasible ,, in more than one manner . A minimal condition we shall require for such definition is the following . Assumption . The distortion feasible set of for of one sided the following : If , then the given probability distribution of the source process , say If is any given pair of one sided , and there an infinite collection of increasing k k such that , for all , For any pair of , and if , then the ¨ , , , , Notice that if this assumption and if the in Definition were restricted to be positive , then we would have see Definition . However , the one way in Assumption allow to be than . Definition Set of Causal . Define as the set of all one sided random which satisfy the causality constraint The set of causally related one sided process C is defined likewise but for one sided provided the exist . The causal with if in one k and k . By contrast , from in that the latter is associated with the less general distortion feasible set see Definition . Since our main result will be stated with the assumption that , we develop next two sufficient for such equality to hold . We begin by a useful construction of a pair of from a finite length sequence and some if the of the former . Proposition . Let , be given , with stationary and such that the causality condition for , ,... Build the as : For every N , choose the conditional distribution of given as The second equality in b together with the fact that is stationary imply that , and thus . On the other hand , we have that where the first inequality due to Proposition , in the Appendix it successively to the The fact that , the definition of and the condition imply that , for all N . The latter together with Assumption On the other hand , together with the fact that for , ,.., Proposition with a ,,, according to the in and in , we readily obtain that , a , We now state a technical lemma which is akin to , Theorem but for one sided , the proof of which can be found in Appendix A . Lemma . Let be a stationary one sided source and suppose the distortion feasible , and satisfy Assumption and the condition Next , we propose a possible definition of general enough to encompass the asymptotic fidelity criteria by . For that purpose , we need to define Notice that with such construction , does not necessarily satisfy Assumption . Also , the distortion feasible , with the specific form given by do not necessarily satisfy the condition . This definition , based on the limit of a sequence of distortion , is clearly capable of the general asymptotic single letter criteria of while satisfying Assumption . Recall that , as shown in Lemma , it is not possible to do this with the distortion feasible set from , given by Definition . In addition , the construction of provided by for several specific criteria commonly found in the literature , such as the one in and in the definition of a rate distortion achievable pair in ,. . We are now in the position to provide two independent that are sufficient to ensure the proof is given in Appendix A . Lemma . Consider the same given in the statement of Lemma . If , in addition , any of the two following With the above , we can state the main result of this section , akin to Theorem but for one sided and for the corresponding causality condition given by the proof is in Appendix A : Theorem . Let the source x be a one sided stationary th order process and suppose that , where and are as defined in and , respectively . Furthermore , suppose that the distortion feasible , , satisfy Assumption and The shift invariance condition : Then the minimization in the definition of in can be restricted to of x , y with which , in addition , satisfy , . aside the obvious difference between Theorem and Theorem from the fact that the former as one sided and the latter two sided , it is worth drawing a parallel between these two . The requirement of Assumption in Theorem is than the requirement of to conform to Definition in Theorem . Thus , Theorem for a class of fidelity criteria . The assumption that can be seen as the equivalent of condition in Theorem to the setting of one sided . The same is true with condition in Theorem with respect to condition in Theorem . However , no are stated in which suffice for condition in Theorem to hold . In contrast , we have provided Lemma , which two independent under which is satisfied . The other in Theorem differ from those in Theorem . Condition in Theorem is than condition in Theorem . Condition in Theorem is absent in Theorem , and is in our proof as a consequence of the transient behavior from treating one sided see Theorem in Section . Remark . Among the distortion criteria which satisfy the of Theorem , we find the family of asymptotic single letter of by , , : , a distortion feasible set to Definition , and hence it is not covered by Theorem . As pointed out by Remark in the Introduction , if now one that x is the positive time part of a two sided stationary process , then the fact that does not guarantee that y causally on x . For the latter to hold in this situation , it is that . This that for this case , the definition of the causal as stated in needs to be extended to Notice that when the source a negative time part , to , and thus strong becomes equal to . The above raise the question of whether Theorem can be extended for the case in which the one sided source is the positive time part of a two sided stationary process . This considering strong instead of , or , equivalently , the strong causality constraint instead of the short causality constraint . It turns out that Theorem can indeed be extended for this situation , thanks to the following proposition , the proof of which can be found in Section A . Proposition . Suppose that x is the positive time part of a two sided that Then there or , equivalently , one can construct a one sided random process such that Theorem Extension of Theorem . Let the source x be the positive time part of a two sided stationary th order process . Under the same made in the statement of Theorem , the in the definition of can be restricted to of Proof . The only difference between the of and is that they consider the causality and , respectively . First , notice that and thus strong . On the other hand , from Theorem , the yielding can be carried out considering only of satisfying and n , x , y . But as a consequence of Proposition , for every such x , y , there a process such that and This that the minimization associated with strong can be restricted to satisfying , and proving the first claim of the theorem and that strong . The latter and the reverse inequality that strong , concluding the proof . The purpose of this section is to establish a correspondence between in . As we discuss next , drawing an appropriate comparison between these two causal two to the definition of already on page . The first modification of extending to account for arbitrary fidelity criteria in an arbitrary distortion feasible set P , . The second modification is necessary in order to make a lower bound to the corresponding operational data rate . To see why , it is necessary to recall how lower the operational data rate of x and it as y . For this purpose , let be the random binary sequence produced by the from time let be the length of in . Since the code must be uniquely , the bit string the Kraft inequality , § . . In general , can be by not only but also x , and thus where a from , Theorem . . and is a consequence of the data inequality , Theorem . . . Thus , lower the operational data rate E as tightly which is precisely the causality constraint for one sided . But , as we have shown in and , such causality constraint is , in general , incompatible with the joint of . As a consequence , since such joint is by , chain cannot hold . This that when the causality constraint for a two sided source established by is Following these , we propose here the following definition of . Definition An and More General Definition of . For any sided stationary source , redefine the causal stationary in , Definition as where Q is the set of all one sided jointly stationary random , and is the set of all of random which satisfy the causality constraint . We can now state the following corollary of Theorem , the proof of which can be found in Appendix A : One important consequence of this result from the fact that , for a th order Gauss stationary source and quadratic distortion , can be found by a convex optimization problem over frequency response of linear time invariant around an additive noise channel , and . The operational relevance of Corollary is that when the latter channel is by an entropy scalar , one a source scheme whose operational rate by at most . sample when operating causally and by at most . sample when operating with zero delay , section . Thanks to Corollary , it turns out that the operational data rate of such scheme within the same with respect to We have shown that , in general , the causal information rate distortion function for one sided stationary cannot be by a reconstruction which is jointly stationary with the source . Nevertheless , if the source is th order , then the search for the causal can be restricted to which are jointly stationary with the source from the th sample . This led us to prove that actually with for a large class of distortion criteria . This that for Gauss and quadratic distortion , can be found by the convex optimization problem derived in . It also that for the same source and distortion , a zero delay average data rate exceeding by not more than approximately . sample is achievable with the scheme in . Proof of Lemma . We will resort to a contradiction argument , and thus start by supposing that there AD . Since is non negative , there must exist a pair of random and a value From the definition of AD , any other pair of which exactly as everywhere except on a single positive index , say , in which , P , and Definition , there a pair of l , l with l such that l l and This , together with the fact that the , satisfy , that where , l l . Hence , any pair of random with pair wise given by together with the collection of satisfy the of Definition , and thus . However , meaning that . This the initial supposition that AD , the proof . By the definition of , we have that o , No , there such that and build the as in Proposition . The mutual information rate between and Since this inequality is satisfied for all o , o , it that , the Proof of Lemma . Since the of Lemma are satisfied , we have that . Therefore , it to show that . , for all . Since all the latter for all No ,, we obtain Since this inequality for all o , o , it that , the first part of the proof . We shall now prove that Assumption and the continuity of . The continuity assumption on that od , for all . By the definition of , we have that , for every , o , there a pair of such that Also , since and from the definition of in , it that there a Since this inequality for all , o , o , and that od when , it that Rit , the proof . Proof of Theorem . Since , it that for all o , there a finite No such that Thus , for all o and for all No there a pair of such that The fact that n as one to define the stationary extension of n such that Starting from we build the as in Proposition . From this construction and the assumption on the distortion feasible given by , we have that Now suppose a random variable uniformly distributed over , ,.. and independent of . Let and define the pair of A similar construction , for two sided , was in the proof of , Theorem seemingly for the first time , building upon . The same idea was in the proof of , Theorem . . Here we adapt it for the case of one sided . are jointly stationary . Thus th order stationary . These imply , in view of and , that the pair may not be causally related according to . However , since see Proposition , we have that does satisfy the ¨ , ,.. , , ,... a ¨ , ,.. , , ,... b The pair further two important . First , Lemma that the of are i . e Second , as we show in Lemma , the mutual information rate of the pair lower , for all . Thus , for every No ,, is for every o and o , it readily that the search for the on the of can be confined to such , the proof . Lemma . Let be the defined in , which are built from see and see and and the text between these and satisfy and . Then . Proof . By construction , are jointly stationary . Thus , all that remains to prove is that see Definition . For this purpose , notice that for all i , where all the stem from the chain rule of mutual information , a because I a ; , and is a consequence of the fact that ¨ , and chain . The mutual information in the middle of can be upper bounded as where the are due to the chain rule of mutual information , a because mutual information is non negative , and ¨ . the definition of ¨ ,¨ see we have that , for the case i , are so as to streamline the presentation of the following . The between all these is in Fig . . Notice that for these the translate into where a because mutual information is non negative and is due to and the fact that Figure . Schematic representation of the change of in . Each dot one element in the and , with time increasing from left to right . Lemma . Let the defined in , built from and and and the text between these . Then where a is due to the non negativity of mutual information and because . But see . Substituting this into we obtain that for , The proof is by taking the limit as and substituting in it . Proof of Proposition . From Fact , there such that and which Proposition with a ,,, corresponding to the under the in and , we obtain directly , the proof . Proof of Corollary . We will first show that and then that the reverse inequality is true as well . can be confined to of which satisfy and such that and . For each such pair , one can construct the pair of where the last equality from the fact that and that and the definition of . In addition , the Therefore , for every pair of which the associated with , there another pair which the in the definition of and the same information rate . This that . In order to show that , consider any pair satisfying and such that . Construct the pair of as the existence of such pair is by the first condition in the statement of Theorem . From Assumption , this construction Proposition to and with in the proposition assigned according to the under and , we obtain that Proof of Proposition . The mutual information between a , a and b , b is given by where all stem from the chain rule of mutual information . Since mutual information is non negative , it that I a ;, if and only if both I a ; and I a ;, are zero . The proof is by that the statement I u ; is equivalent to the chain u . ﻿ We consider a system subject to an average data rate constraint in the feedback path . We provide upper to the minimal source rate to achieve mean square stability and a desired level of performance . In the quadratic case , an almost complete rate distortion characterization is . This paper on the interplay between average in per sample and stationary performance for a control system a noisy plant and an average data rate constraint in the feedback path . In such a setup , the of guarantee that it is possible to find causal and such that the resulting closed loop system is mean square stable , if and only if the average data rate is greater than the sum of the logarithm of the absolute value of the unstable plant . This result been extended in several see , e .., , . However , when performance subject to average data rate are sought , there are relatively available . Indeed , to our knowledge , there are no computable of the optimal in control , , , , . In this note , we present upper and lower on the minimal average data rate that one to attain a given performance level as measured by the stationary variance of the plant output . From a source perspective , we are aiming at the rate distortion function in closed loop . This beyond causal rate distortion theory due to being subject to a stability constraint . Our exploit a framework for control system design subject to average data in , . Consider the of Figure , an plant with state and initial state , u is the control input , is a sensor output , e is a signal related to closed loop performance , and is a disturbance . We assume that , are jointly second order and with finite . The feedback path in Figure a noiseless digital channel , a causal whose output is a sequence of binary , and a causal . Fig . . control system . average data rate across the channel is defined as We do not restrict the complexity of the or the a , and only assume them to be causal , and to have access to independent side information SE and . Our aim is where se trace , is the stationary variance matrix of e , is a desired level of performance , and the optimization is carried out with respect to all causal E render the resulting asymptotically mean square stable , i . e ., that render , u , jointly second order and asymptotically wide sense stationary . I u I uG , where I a the mutual information rate between a and , and , uG are jointly with the same second order statistics as , u . Thus , in order to bound from below , it to minimize the directed mutual information rate that would appear across the source scheme , when all in the loop are jointly . Lemma . : Suppose that , in Fig . are second order and jointly random . Then can be from as u i Li , i , i ,..., where , for each i ,...,, i is a zero mean random variable such that i , , si , and Fig . . that when , in Figure , the E a linear source scheme . where Li : i is a linear operator such that Li , is the minimum mean square error estimator of u i given , . We conclude from the above that , for a given performance level , the minimum of I uG over all causal and is achievable by an pair which as a linear system plus additive white noise such that i , , i . We next define the class of linear source , which are capable of yielding a relationship u of the form given by . Definition . : A source scheme is said to be linear if and only if , when used around a noiseless digital channel , is such that its output u are related via auxiliary , is a second order i . i .. sequence , proper , independent of ,. When a linear source scheme is used in the of Figure , the feedback system of Figure . Lemma . : Consider the of Figure and assume that the E and a linear source scheme . Under suitable , I u I and where is the stationary power spectral density is the variance of the auxiliary noise . Linear source have sufficient of freedom to allow one to compromising . Thus , our lead to : Theorem . : Consider the of Figure under suitable . Define , with reference to the feedback scheme of Figure , the signal to noise ratio function where sa , a ,, e , is the stationary variance of a in Figure , and the optimization is carried out with respect to all and all render Theorem . the minimal average data rate that a given stationary performance level , in of , i . e ., in of the minimal that the desired performance level in a related architecture . Interestingly , the upper bound in is valid even if one the assumption of , being To find , one can resort to the in . A case where an explicit solution is available is when , i . e ., when only stabilization is sought . In that case , it from Theorem . and that where p ,..., are the unstable of . If one in and , then one , within a modest gap , the absolute minimal average data rate compatible with stability derived in . ﻿ The objective of this note is to report some potentially useful mutual information . Throughout this section , and unless otherwise stated ,, xi , i N ,, continuous random taking in appropriate of . We assume that they all have well defined probability density , which we denote by , and , respectively , and well defined joint by . We also use the notation to refer to the conditional of , given . All and in this section are standard and can be found in . Definition Differential entropy The differential entropy defined via independent , then eh eh eh eh is entropy power of . This property is entropy power inequality . Definition Mutual information The mutual information defined via Definition chain The random , said to form a chain in that order if and only if , , i . e ., if and only conditionally independent given . If that is the case , we write Theorem Data inequality If , then I ; I ;. Equality if and only if , in addition ,. ¤¤¤ Definition Divergence between The divergence of the distribution respect to the distribution of in short , the divergence is defined by If is a second order random variable any other random variable with the same mean and covariance matrix , then Remark Conditional divergence It will prove useful to consider an extension of the definition of divergence . Given two joint and , we define the conditional divergence between them via If and are jointly random joint , arbitrary random a joint with the same first and second order as , then We end this section with an extension of the notion of differential entropy to random . Definition Differential entropy rate Consider an asymptotically stationary process . The differential entropy rate defined by stationary , then it is clear that , with equality if and only a sequence of independent random recall Fact . Theorem Differential entropy rate see , e .., , If a stationary process is by a stable filter frequency response , then the filter entropy rate given by Lemma Consider the situation in Figure , dimensional random that have arbitrary . independent , and and denote independent dimensional random the same mean and covariance matrix , respectively , then Proof : and , the independence of , and and the definition of , it is easy to see that Lemma Consider the situation in Figure , dimensional random , is arbitrary distribution . If an dimensional random variable , jointly with , the same mean and covariance matrix as , and such that the cross covariance cross covariance between and , then with equality if the covariance matrix non singular , and jointly with . Use of the in Remark the first part of the result . Clearly , , then equality in . The proof of the converse can be found in . ¤¤¤ Lemma Consider the situation in Figure , independent scalar random with arbitrary . If and denote independent scalar random the same mean and covariance matrix , and , then Proof : We will use the proof of Lemma . If the right hand side in equality a in were positive , then the result would be true . Thus , we will start examining the difference where we have used Fact , the independence of , and . On the other hand , the entropy power inequality one to conclude that , since , are independent , and , since the variance of the and non random is the same , we have from where a from Fact and from and , and the fact that the variance of the and non random is the same . The result and in equality a in . ¤¤¤ Definition Consider two . We define if the exist the mutual information rate Lemma Consider the feedback system in Figure , where is stable and strictly proper i . e ., , is a random process , an i . i .. sequence that is independent of the initial state of . Then , Proof : By definition of mutual information rate and the chain rule of mutual information we have that on , it that I i ; wi I i ; di wi . Thus , where a from Fact , from the definition Fact , from the fact that , by definition of , wi , di ni , di for every random variable , and from the fact that , independent of the initial state of , is independent , thus , i ni di . We also have that where a from the definition of in Figure , from Fact and the fact that , by definition , wi , , di for every random variable , and from the fact that both the initial state of independent of , being i . i .., and being strictly proper that i . Use of Theorem , and the Bode integral theorem see , e .., the result . ¤¤¤ ﻿ This paper with control system design subject to average data rate . By on , and a class of source , we establish lower and upper on the minimal average data rate to achieve a performance level . We also provide a specific source scheme , within the class , that is to achieve the desired performance level at average data below our upper bound . Our are based upon a recently framework to address control subject to average data rate . The study of control subject to communication recently received much attention in the control community see , e .., the in the special issue . Within this framework , a key question to the trade between control and communication . This paper on the interplay between average data rate in per sample and stationary performance in a class of control . When stability is the sole control objective , the of guarantee that , for a noisy plant model and subject to mild on the noise statistics , it is possible to find causal , and such that the resulting closed loop system is mean square stable , if and only if the average data rate is greater than the sum of the logarithm of the absolute value of the unstable plant . This result a fundamental separation line between what is achievable in over digital and what is not , when the problem of interest is mean square stability see also the thorough discussion in the survey paper . When performance subject to average data rate are sought , there are relatively available . There exist lower on the mean square norm of the plant state that make explicit the fact that , as the average data rate the absolute minimum for stability , the performance becomes arbitrarily poor when are present , . This irrespective of how the coder , and controller are chosen . Unfortunately , it is unclear whether or not these are tight in general . A more general performance approach been in , . In those works , for separation and certainty equivalence have been in the context of quadratic stochastic for fully with data rate in the feedback path . If the a specific recursive structure , then certainty equivalence and a quasi separation principle hold . This result is interesting , but does not give a computable characterization of the optimal . A similar drawback is by the in . In that work , performance related are expressed in of the so sequential rate distortion function , which is very difficult to compute in general . For fully first order , an expression for the sequential rate distortion function . However , it is not clear from the in whether or not the sequential rate distortion function is tight see Section in . Other works related to the performance of control subject to data rate are in and . The first work on noiseless state estimation subject to data rate under three different criteria . The case most relevant to this work an asymptotic in time quadratic criterion to measure the state reconstruction error . For such a measure , it is shown in that the bound established in is sufficient to achieve any asymptotic distortion level . This is , however , at the expense of arbitrarily large estimation for any given finite time . This feature of the solution the in too optimistic . On the other hand , non linear stochastic control over noisy , and a functional i . e ., not explicit characterization of the optimal control is . In this paper , we focus on . Our main contribution is a characterization of upper and lower on the minimal average data rate that one to attain a given performance level as measured by the stationary variance of the plant output . To that end , we focus on a specific class of source that , as special , the studied in , . We also provide a specific source scheme , within the class , that is to achieve the desired performance level at average data below our upper bound . Instrumental to our is the characterization of the minimal signal to noise ratio that a closed loop performance level in a related class of . , . The remainder of this paper is organized as : Section the problem of interest in this paper , and the class of considered source . Section , for the class of source in Section , a relationship between average data and an internal . Section on the interplay between and closed loop performance . These are then used in Section to present our main contribution . Section . Notation : the set of real , the set of strictly positive real , for the magnitude absolute value of . is the set of all proper and real rational transfer , all stable transfer in , and U all the , all the strictly proper transfer in minimum phase transfer in . L and L are defined as usual , and the associated are by and , respectively . This paper on the of Figure . In that figure , is a plant , u is the control input , is the plant output , an input disturbance . The feedback path in Figure an error free digital channel , and thus quantization becomes mandatory . This task is carried out by an whose output correspond to the binary . These are then back into real by a . It is clear that the and also embody a controller for the plant . As will become clear as we proceed , a distinction between the controller task and the task is rather artificial in our setup . Assumption The strictly proper , free of unstable hidden , and no or on the unit circle . The initial state of the plant , and the disturbance , are such that , is jointly second order ; is stationary and spectral factor U . In this paper we focus on source i . e ., of the following type : Definition The source scheme of Figure is said to be linear if and only if its output u are related via a second order zero mean i . i .. sequence , is independent of and , are the transfer of with deterministic initial . The class of linear the class of so independent and i . i .. in , . We acknowledge that it is a restricted class of . However , its simplicity one to actually address control system design subject to average data rate . Any linear source scheme can be written as shown in Figure a , where E and are proper transfer . The design of E and is however non trivial . Indeed , it is easy to see that designing E and to an optimal control problem subject to sparsity . To the best of our knowledge , the only known sufficient see that allow one to pose such as convex are not satisfied in our case . by the previous discussion , we introduce the alternative of a linear source scheme shown in Figure , where , E ,, are the transfer of with deterministic initial . In the scheme of Figure , is redundant . However , as will become clear below , this over of linear source one to construct a convex optimization problem that is equivalent to that of designing and E in Figure a . When the linear source scheme of Figure is used in the of Figure , the feedback system of Figure . For future reference we define Remark In the remainder of this paper , when we refer to a linear source scheme , it must be understood that we refer to the specific architecture of Figure , in In this section we make a connection between the average data rate across a linear source scheme , and the stationary second order of the Figure . In order to do so , we first make the relationship between those and the channel in Figure explicit . Without loss of generality , we assume that the link Figure is given by the scheme of Figure . In that figure , E ,, and are causal such that where , are possibly nonlinear time deterministic , and SE , , SH correspond to side information that becomes available at time the side , side , and both at the and sides , respectively . The range of is assumed to be countable , and that of , to be a countable set of prefix free binary . The and are chosen so as to satisfy for any , and any N . Condition explicit the fact that act as a transparent link between the output of E and the input Figure . Since we assume an error free digital channel , and , it that . It is clear that , when one the scheme of Figure as the link a linear source scheme , one needs to focus on , such that the process the in Definition . We also note that , since , the feedback link the side in Figure does not require a physical channel . To at the side , it to the side . We denote the length of the symbol i by i , and define the average data rate across the considered source scheme as The Di is such that , i N , there another deterministic . such that i . e ., is invertible upon knowledge of Assumption a is by the sensible requirement that the Figure only past and present , and side information not related to the message being sent , to construct its current output . On the other hand , if , for some and , Assumption does not hold , then one can define another set of that achieve a the same statistics as in the original situation , but at the expense of a lower average data rate . Accordingly , if one at , then one can focus , without loss of , on and satisfying Assumption . The main focus of this paper is on the minimal average data rate that one to attain a given performance level , as measured by the stationary variance of the plant output . With the above , we are now in a position to formally define the problem of interest as : Problem Consider the of Figure , suppose that Assumption , that the source scheme is linear , and that the scheme of Figure is used as the link . Denote by the minimum stationary variance is achievable in the of Figure when . Find , for a given performance level , , where is the stationary variance of , and the optimization is carried out with respect to : • All causal Definition , Assumption ., by , such that the noise see is as Remark and the auxiliary definition of independent source scheme that , the in Definition , the considered in Problem ,,, E In order to solve Problem , we will first establish a lower bound on the average data rate across a linear source scheme in of stationary second order of the see Figure . The existence of this bound Section , where we study the optimal design of linear source subject to . These are then used in Section to give both upper and lower on . This section the of Section A in to show that , when a linear source scheme is used in the of Figure , the minimum average data rate across it subject to a performance constraint is bounded from below by a simple function of the minimum ratio between the stationary subject to the same performance constraint . To do so , we start by that the following : Theorem Consider the of Figure where the source scheme is linear , and the link , given by the scheme of Figure . If ,,, E and and where I the directed mutual information rate , , and is the variance of . Moreover , equality in the and , is the stationary power spectral density of inequality if and only . Proof : The first inequality immediately from Theorem in . The second inequality from Part of Lemma . in , and from the proof of Theorem in see also Theorem . Theorem a lower bound on the average data rate across a linear source scheme in of a simple function of the spectrum the equivalent noise variance . This key result , upon which the remainder of this paper is based upon , can be further simplified . Note that inequality where is the stationary variance of , and is the of the linear source scheme . By finding the minimal subject to a performance constraint e .., an upper bound on the stationary variance of the plant output , one is also calculating an upper bound on the minimal value of the right hand side of , subject to the same performance constraint . If , in addition , the optimal solution to the former minimization problem is such that the gap between the left and right hand sides of the inequality in is arbitrarily small or can be made so without compromising , then , by virtue of Theorem , one would immediately get a lower bound on by the much simpler minimization problem . The following result that this is actually the case : Lemma Consider the of Figure , where the source scheme is linear and a fixed noise source . Suppose that Assumption and define . If the choice ,,, E H , C , F , E ,,, such that s , Fand , , then , for any arbitrarily that , f and , in addition , , there exist Proof : The proof of this result goes along the of the proof of Theorem in . by the discussion preceding Lemma , we will now focus on the following problem : Problem Consider the of Figure where the source scheme is linear , and suppose that Assumption . Define , where pi is the unstable pole of . Find , for a given , , Remark It from Theorem in that to the minimal compatible with mean square stability in the of Figure . We note that Problem is concerned with the best achievable performance , as measured by , that is achievable when an upper on the . As shown in Lemma below , this problem is equivalent to the problem of finding the minimal achievable subject to an upper bound on . Our momentary change of focus is only due to technical see Remark below . The next lemma necessary for the ,,, E to belong to : Lemma Consider the of Figure where the source scheme is linear , and suppose that Assumption . Define and consider a factorization N , i . e ., consider . If ,,, EX ,, , , Proof : It is clear from Figure in open loop . be stable to ensure the internal stability of the loop . On the other hand , a possibly non linear and discontinuous , accordingly , must be strictly proper for the architecture to be well the same conclusion to ,,, E must contain as non minimum phase all the unstable , be an admissible one degree of freedom controller . Therefore , must belong to H , E , . If Lemma . . in . Denote all the unstable we have from the Bode Integral Theorem that , for , E , i , . To complete the proof , we note that is the closed loop transfer function from a disturbance at the input the output . By the , we thus conclude that must be as . By virtue of Lemma , we are now ready to present a lower bound on the best achievable performance . To that end , we will make use of the following mild additional assumption : If EH were identically zero at the optimum , then optimal performance would be by open loop . The where this are clearly of no interest in a control setting . Theorem Consider the of Figure where the source scheme is linear , and suppose that and hold . Then where the zero of . Moreover , the optimization problem on the right hand side of is convex i . e . is a convex function of its , and is a convex set . Proof : Under our we have that , for any ,,, E and , and exist and are given by A simple contradiction based argument that , since Assumption , the constraint in is active at the optimum . Hence , at the optimum , where the first equality upon for with , and the inequality from the inequality and the fact that . If one and . that , then the first part of the result immediately from , and Lemma To complete the proof we need to show that the optimization problem on the right hand side of Lemma in convex . Since is an function of , is a convex function of its . The proof is thus ., and both convex , it from Theorem that one can calculate a lower bound on the best achievable performance subject to an constraint by a convex optimization problem . Convexity , among other , that the problem of finding the bound and also and such that , for any , Remark As an alternative to Problem , one can also consider the problem of finding the minimal subject to a performance constraint . By doing so , and by proceeding as in the proof of Theorem , one at an auxiliary optimization problem whose convexity we have not been able to prove yet . We will next show that a solution of the optimization problem on the right hand side of actually a solution to Problem . To that end , we start by that the following : . Equation by the proof of Lemma in , and by the definition of . The that is an admissible one degree of freedom controller for . Thus , as all the unstable of . Accordingly , is stable , , and as the unstable plant only . Given the definition of , , we thus conclude that , and that , is also stable . Since , by assumption , is stable , we have that , L is analytic outside and on the unit circle and can thus be to any degree of accuracy Theorem Consider the of Figure where the source scheme is linear , and recall the notation in Lemma . If and hold , then Moreover , for any > , there , , such that , satisfying the in Part of Lemma , and satisfying Proof : Our first claim immediately from the second , which is proved below . Since , E and , recall the definition of den , it that the choice of a well feedback loop . We next show that the choice of internal stability . To do so , we first note that the open loop transfer function u is given by HE . As such , there exist no unstable pole zero between . From the proof of Lemma , we know that is an admissible one degree of freedom controller for and . Moreover , it is clear by construction see and that there are no unstable pole zero cancellation among any two transfer in the set , E , . The above imply that the closed loop is internally stable . Thus , since , dis stable since f , it that there a , is admissible , the in Part of Lemma . On the other hand , and is stable . As a consequence of the above , such that s q The fact that our choice of upon in , and that . To complete the proof , it remains to show that the set of is such that , for any . By definition of , see , the choice for E in is such that there E L such that and the numerator of the second term on the right hand side of can be written as In , the first equality upon and , the inequality from the inequality , and the last equality from the fact that our choice of , and from our choice and thus , . By the above and the use the definition of and The result immediately from . Note that upon and , hence , to be chosen , once is chosen . Theorem a characterization of the solution of Problem . In the next section , we will use this result to characterize on . on the Minimal Average Data rate to Achieve a Given Performance Level This section a characterization of the solution of Problem . In particular , we present both upper and lower on , and also a specific implementation of a linear source scheme that an average data rate that is to be below our upper bound . Lemma Consider the of Figure where the source scheme is linear , and suppose that and hold . Define Proof : By Problem one a set of such that and recall that Assumption that the constraint is active at the optimum . It is therefore immediate to see that , by definition , G is impossible . Assume now that and are the that minimize ,. Then , since the constraint in Problem is active at the optimum , we have that Lemma that Problem is equivalent to the problem of finding in . That is , if some choice of the ,,, E and solve Problem and thus achieve a performance level and an , then the same optimize the subject to the constraint Theorem Consider the setup and of Problem . If , in addition , Assumption and , then . Moreover , there a linear source scheme such that , while satisfying for any . We now prove our second claim . Use Theorem to find ,,, E Ho , and a noise variance so such that and for the desired value of . Consider an entropy as the link , i . e ., pick E ,, and in Figure such that where is a dither signal available at both the and sides accordingly , SE SH ,: i ; i to a uniform with step size , to the an entropy coder also loss less whose output symbol is chosen the conditional distribution of , given , and to the the entropy that is complementary to the entropy coder at the side . If is an i . i .. sequence , independent of ,, and uniformly distributed on , , with so , then our claim from Corollary in . Theorem a lower bound on the minimal average data rate that is to achieve a given performance level , when linear source are employed to control . This lower bound is not tight , but the worst case gap is given by per sample i . e ., . per sample . The first term of this gap to the divergence of the from , and due to the fact that generate uniform quantization noise and not noise . The second term because practical entropy see proof of Theorem are not perfectly efficient , Chapter . A detailed discussion of these can be found in , . Since we constrain ourselves to a simple class of source , this gap inescapable but , in our view , it is a fair price to be given the simplicity of our approach . A key aspect of our is that they are built upon the solution of an optimization problem . This is a key feature of our work , and one to easily provide average data rate in feedback , by standard control system design . Remark If in Problem one the performance constraint , then the problem to the calculation of the minimal average data rate that is compatible with mean square stability , say . By Theorem in , and proceeding as in the proof of Theorem , it that , for the setup and of the latter theorem , where pi is unstable pole of . That is , independent source can achieve at average data that are at most per sample away from the absolute lower bound established in . This paper studied control closed over noiseless digital . By on a class of source , we have established lower and upper on the minimal average data rate to achieve a performance level . Instrumental to our result was the characterization of the minimal that a given closed loop performance in a related control system . Future work should focus on that include causal but otherwise unrestricted source . to the case are also under study by the . ﻿ In this paper , we study a node asymmetric two way relay channel with relay private where two can communicate with each other only through a third node the relay , while the relay can itself exchange private with two other . Cut set upper bound and single sided genie upper bound are for this channel . To obtain an achievable rate , we use a superposition of lattice and random for at the , and successive interference cancelation for at the . It is shown that are within constant and . sec per user of single sided genie for restricted and non restricted , respectively . the potential to obtain higher coverage extension and throughput enhancement at lower cost . One of the important research in this area is two way relay channel where two can exchange information via a relay . It is commonly used as a building block in network . It was shown in , that by joint decode and forward and network , nearly optimal throughput can be accessible for the broadcast phase but it loss in as expressed in . In , it was shown that compress and forward scheme within half bit of the capacity region in the setting . In another powerful method , compute and forward , the relay linear of the instead of each of them completely by knowing their own can extract the desired by linear . This method can exploit interference for gains as well as noise suppression . Based on this concept , in , an achievable scheme based on lattice was for the asymmetric , which was shown to achieve the cut set bound within bit . In , by lattice , the sum capacity of channel is within additive gap of sec and multiplicative gap of sec of single sided genie upper bound . In , by a superposition of lattice and random , the capacity region of two pair bidirectional relay network to within sec per user is . In this paper , we consider an asymmetric full duplex with relay private where two user can communicate with each other through a third node the relay . The relay its own private to be to two other , and also some of are to be used only at the relay . For simplicity , we use the term to refer to this model , in the sequel . There is no direct link between the . Forward and backward between the relay and are assumed to be asymmetric . We consider both restricted and non restricted for this channel . This situation the case where a base station between and between the backbone system and the . In , the deterministic capacity of was and was shown to be with single sided genie upper bound . Here we consider and obtain two upper for this channel based on the cut set upper bound , and the single sided genie upper bound . Also we present an achievable rate for this channel based on the in and . In , lattice are used for that must be between the while superimposed random are used for that must be at the relay private . In , structured binning and successive interference cancelation are used at the . By examining the achievable rate region , we show that for all channel gains , it within and . sec per user of single sided genie upper bound for restricted and non restricted , respectively . The paper is organized as : In section , system model and some are . The upper and achievable for are in and , respectively . In section , capacity gap calculation is . Some concluding are provided in section . Consider as shown in Fig . . All are assumed to be full duplex , and there is a forward and a backward channel between each node and the relay . Let . ., , log , , ,, and Si i , i , i . e . excluding i . Node i , to be to the Si , where positive real set . The are assumed to be independent . The of node i are into a an function . where the symbol of , is a realization of a real random variable , satisfying the power constraint received at node i . This is non restricted which can result some dependency between the by different . In contrast , restricted the function The received signal at node i at time given by the following . where the channel gain between i ,, i . is a realization of i . i .. noise i , with zero mean and unit variance . Each node i a function to decode Si as , a vector i ,, i and the sum rate is by Pi ,, i . The , or fi restricted , and define a code , for . A error if i ,, i . A said to be achievable if there a sequence of , with an average error probability that zero as . The set of all achievable rate the capacity the . The sum capacity is the maximum achievable sum rate given by . The degree of freedom is defined as . log . log where the ratio of available transmit noise power which is one . Next , we review some on lattice that will be used in the sequel . For more see and the therein . A lattice code is defined in of two and , which form a lattice partition , i . e ., . The lattice code is a lattice code which as and the region of as a shaping region . For , the set of coset is defined as . In , Theorem , an achievable rate was for , where two lattice were designed , one for each source node . The theorem is as , Theorem : For an , with power P P on the of the , and on the of the relay . The following region is , where , and , denote of zero mean at the relay and and . The achievable rate region in Theorem is within bit of the cut set upper bound , regardless of channel . Remark : Note that , in the , although the channel setting is broadcast , and achieve their point to point channel , second of the two in Theorem , without being affected by each other . This is because of the side information on the message at each node and the binning of message . For the complete proof see , Theorem . In this section , we present cut set upper bound and single sided genie upper bound for both non restricted and restricted . The cut set provide upper from a its complement . The cut set for the are provided in the following theorem . Theorem : The capacity region of non restricted is upper bounded by Corollary : The sum capacity of non restricted is upper bounded by min P P P , P P and constraint satisfy . Proof : By , the first term of is . By , , and , the second term of According to the general in , Sec ., in the traditional cut set . . , the are divided into which represent the and , respectively . in each of these are assumed to fully by their side information . the traditional cut set bound to relay loose . In contrast , in the single sided genie bound , not all the in a set can share their side information . This method was used in the proof of the following theorem . Proof : Single sided genie approach is used to bound the last two sum as : To obtain the bound for R in , we assume that a genie to node to node . To obtain the bound for R in , we assume that a genie to node and to node . To obtain the bound for R in , we assume that a genie to node and to node . To obtain the bound for R in , we assume that a genie to node and to The Proof of some are in Appendix A . The whole strategy is similar to what was done in . The exist in the used side information which is from the between the nature of two . In channel , the are in the same symmetric situation around the relay and the relay have any private message . But in , the relay also as a sender node and is in a different situation in comparison to the other two . P and constraint satisfy . Proof : By , the first term of is . Also by to , is . In this section , we consider restricted which the function instead of . In this model the transmit are independent which to a upper bound . Corollary and , and and are true for this model except that the term P should be with in , , , . In this section , we present an achievable rate for . In our scheme , we use , so it is an achievable rate for both restricted and non restricted . The scheme the superposition of lattice and random for at the , and successive interference cancelation for at the . It can be considered as a mixture of the method for in , and the method for bidirectional relay network in . In strategy , each user its message into two , one for at the relay and one for at the other user . It random for the first part and lattice for the second part which is not necessary to be by the relay . We should mention that there is a difference between this method and the one used in in which no private are assumed by the relay . In fact in , if we have e .., R R , user its message into a and a lattice , while user only a lattice . But we believe that by Theorem , it is not necessary to consider random for the part of the message of user with rate R R . All can be by lattice . In the next step , the relay random code , and the linear equation of two lattice , with successive interference cancellation . Then , the relay its own private intended for each user and the linear equation of two lattice , each into a random , and the weighted superposition of them to two . The last step is at the , where each user first the undesired that have than the desired . Thus , those are and successively from the received signal one by one . For the limited space of the paper , in the following , we only consider the case where the of relay private are greater than the rate of the other . According to the strategy , The transmit at the are given by , of size , , and , for i , , respectively . and are lattice with sizes and respectively . The relay first the , , simultaneously , then the lattice point . It can be done successfully so long as , from of size , for i , , respectively , with R , R . We consider the case . Other case can be by the same interpretation . The at the can be done by successive interference cancelation as : at user : It can be done successfully so long as , at user : First user , then by Theorem , be . It can be done successfully so long as , In next section , we show that by choosing power coefficient appropriately any rate within a constant of the upper bound is achievable . In this section , we establish the capacity gap calculation for from single sided genie upper bound . Since the gap between the corresponding upper of restricted and non restricted is within sec , we only characterize the capacity gap calculation for restricted in the following lemma . The proof of this conjecture is shown based on the in section , via the following : Lemma : By the strategy , for any rate r , r , , satisfying there a choice of power i ,, i such that of with i ,, i can be done with arbitrary small error probability for all channel gain . See the proof . Note that if I , where I the unit vector , , then the rate the of Lemma . Thus , the sum capacity and the capacity of restricted can be within sec , and sec per user of single sided genie upper bound , respectively . By respect to , these are . sec , and . sec per user of single sided genie upper bound for non restricted , respectively . Note that each user i two corresponding , i . In this paper , we studied the capacity region of an two way relay channel with relay private with no direct link between . In this model the relay can exchange private with the in addition to the communication between two . We consider both restricted independent and non restricted dependent . We a cut set upper bound and a single sided genie for upper bound for restricted and non restricted . Then we extracted an achievable rate for this channel which was shown to be within constant and . sec per user of single sided genie are for restricted and non restricted , respectively . The scheme applied the same strategy in which is based on superposition of lattice and random for , and successive interference cancelation for . Proof : By inequality , and by considering that side information is available at user and where as . a from the fact that the are independent . and , where from the fact that entropy . from the fact that given , i , and are independent . Again , we consider genie side information and to and , respectively . By inequality and assuming independent , we have , from and the fact that is a function of , , . e from and given are completely known . from and the fact that entropy . Starting with for : From and , we have , r r a a , and , Starting with for : It is obvious that is redundant since and log is an increasing function of . By working on the other , we have , ﻿ In this work , we deal with zero delay source of an unstable vector Auto Regressive AR source under average mean square error fidelity criterion . To begin with , we consider zero delay of a vector AR source in state space form . It turns out to be convenient to use an asymptotically stationary time domain scheme with feedback , which was recently in in the context of filtering theory via the Information Nonanticipative Rate Distortion Function . In this scheme , the feedback path a filter , which an estimate of the source . Our idea is then to encode the vector due to filtering via lattice quantization with subtractive dither and memoryless entropy . We show that the resulting system is stable and furthermore provide new to the . We then generalize our to vector AR of any order . With this , we are able to establish a approach with feedback , which by use of a single filter very close to the zero delay for vector AR of any order . Interestingly , for infinite dimensional vector , the with the Optimal Performance Theoretically Attainable by zero delay . Zero delay of information in source is the reproduction of each source sample at the same time instant that the source sample is . Zero delay source is desirable in various , like for instance , signal and network control , . The class of zero delay is a subclass of the so causal source where the reproduction of the current source sample only on the present and past source but not on the future source . A preference for zero delay source over causal source from the fact that the latter does not exclude the possibility of long of , which for arbitrary end to end . Of course , every zero delay code needs to be causal , but the opposite is not true . It is well known that zero delay and causal in with non causal cannot achieve the classical rate distortion function , i . e ., the optimal performance theoretically attainable by the class of . Indeed , an open problem in information theory is the gap between the by non causal , hereinafter by , and the by causal and , hereinafter by and , respectively . Notable where this gap is explicitly found are memoryless , stationary in high , and zero mean stationary scalar with average mean square error distortion . Throughout the , the interest in information theoretic rate distortion that as tight as possible to the by causal or zero delay been very high . For example , the in the so entropy , hereinafter by , to demonstrate its utility in real time zero delay . Perhaps the most striking result inspired by , is the work of where the author the so sequential , hereinafter by , to investigate control related . A decade later , the in , the so information nonanticipative , by , in the context of filtering theory . The work of with the work of that under squared error distortion , for any AR source , the optimal reproduction distribution of the output , conditioned upon , X ,..., , Y ,..., , to i . e ., , , . the latter structural result , the in used an unstable AR source and a lower bound to . This bound can be by a feedback realization that was first in , where a filter a prediction of to the , which then via that act as the prediction error . Interestingly , it turns out that the filter in is from the noisy and thereby parallel a result of al . , on the of a stable , stationary , and scalar process by noisy prediction . Note that for stable stationary , the use of filter is not mandatory . In this paper , we show the following : For the case of zero mean unstable vector fully AR with average fidelity , the feedback realization scheme of by the work in , that an upper bound to the can be by the due to a filter in a feedback loop , which the source based on its noisy . We provide a simple quantization strategy and assess the rate loss as to the achievable lower bound see Theorem . In addition , we show how to generalize our scheme to vector AR of any order see Theorem . When the vector source is unstable , it is necessary to guarantee that the feedback realization is stable under quantization . We provide an upper bound to the due to finite dimensional quantization of the . We show that the rate loss is finite and directly linked to the space filling loss of the as well as the loss of the entropy coder due to zero delay . If the vector dimension of the source to infinity , it is possible to completely eliminate the rate loss and thereby show that in this limit , the with the see Section . This paper is structured as . In Section we cast our problem . In and we derive upper and lower to the by zero delay and we discuss possible and related . In draw . Notation : We let , , N , ,.... For N , we denote random and dimensional with , i . e ., and , respectively . The transpose of a matrix or by . We denote by any term that is . For a square matrix with on the row and column , we denote by the matrix , i ,...,, on its diagonal and zero elsewhere . We denote the time index with and the dimension index with i . In this paper we consider the zero delay source setting in Fig . . In this setting , the dimensional vector source is by the following linear time invariant state space model ; is the initial state , and the noise process is an i . i .. ; sequence , independent of x . The system as . At every time step , ,..., the the source and a single binary from a alphabet set of at most a countable number of . Since the source is random , and its length are random . Upon , the an estimate of the source sample . We assume that both the and process information without delay and they are to have infinite memory of the past . The analysis of the noiseless digital channel is restricted to the class of instantaneous variable length binary . The countable set of all is time Fig . : A zero delay source scenario binary . to allow the binary representation to be an arbitrarily long sequence . There is no loss by to uniquely . The and are by of probability density as , : , ,... and , :, where is the distortion level , , yn The objective is to minimize the average length by . These design are formally cast by the following optimization problem : that A , is see , e .., to ensure that the limit in i . e ., . In this section , we present a lower bound on the by zero delay the , . In general , the expression of the by zero delay given by is very hard to find and often are see , for example , , . First , recall that since the by zero delay is a subset to the by causal see Section I then Moreover , it is also known that for general the following hold see , e .., , equation . Note that , inequality a is strict , in general , and becomes equality when the source is i . i .. or when the rate to infinity . In contrary , inequality is strict at high high resolution due to space filling loss and becomes equality at zero rate . Also , for unstable like the source model of , to be greater or equal to the sum of the unstable of matrix A , i . e ., whose are greater than one see e .., . Since , the is a lower bound on the by zero delay to the classical , we can use this information measure to obtain on . In nonanticipative rate distortion theory see e .., , , the mutual information can be written as where E is the expectation with respect to the joint probability distribution with , , yn , while is the marginal induced by the joint probability distribution , yn . We now state the definition of as given in , where the in is taken with respect to the sequence of conditional probability density , : , ,...,. If one by lim in , then an upper bound to is , defined as . It is shown in that provided the limit in , and the source is stationary then na . The optimization problem of , in contrast to the one given in is convex see . In addition , due to the assumption of on the pair A , of . , channel , via an asymptotically stationary feedback realization scheme in Fig . to find the optimal causal and zero delay information based filter . A detailed analysis on this scheme is provided in , Section . Next , we briefly explain the methodology in Fig . . : N of : N based on the previous y ,..., defined by The covariance matrix is by a unitary transformation E invertible matrix such that at : Analogously , we introduce the error process : N defined by , and the scaling process : N defined by with , , ;, and The fidelity criterion at not affected by the above of , : N , in the sense that the at both the and do not affect the form of the distortion function , that is , basic of conditional entropy see , e .., . , it can be shown that Fig . : Realization of the optimal distribution , see Section A . In this section , we derive upper to the by zero delay a universal quantization scheme based on a subtractive dither with uniform scalar quantization on the feedback realization scheme in Fig . . Toward this end , we consider unstable vector AR source as in , and we quantize each time operating , with their being jointly entropy conditioned to the dither . Our approach is far from new in the literature . In fact , it is adopted in a variety of , e .., , , . to these works , our scheme with a purely information theoretic setup while at the same time it more general and . Before we proceed , we state the definition of a scalar uniform with subtractive dither . A scalar function is defined as where is the quantization step which is freely designed by the designer . A scalar universal uniform with subtractive dither is defined as the realization of a uniformly distributed random the interval . The execution of a common randomness both at the and the . In practice , the a synchronized pseudo random noise generator that can be used at both and end . Next , we use use the asymptotically stationary feedback realization scheme in Fig . to design an efficient We select the step size so that the covariance of the resulting quantization error . The does not quantize the state directly . Instead , it the deviation of from the linear estimate of . This method is known in least estimation theory as approach . As a result , we name the . We consider the zero delay source setup in Fig . with the additional change of the parallel channel operating . This change is in Fig . . Note that , all matrices and adopted in Fig . still hold when the change is applied . For each time step , the input to the , is a scaled estimation error defined as Fig . : scalar uniform quantization by a dimensional channel operating . Moreover , at is an valued random process . The parallel dimensional channel is operating , hence we can design the covariance the corresponding to the parallel in such a way , that for each , each diagonal entry of , i ,...,, i . e .,, V ,..., to correspond to a quantization step size i , i ,...,, such that This into a input output transmission of parallel and independent . We apply to each component of at , i . e ., and we let be the valued random process of dither whose individual , ,... are mutually independent and uniformly distributed random independent of the corresponding source input at , i , , i . The output of the is given by , i i at , i , i , i ,...,. Note that , ,..., , can take a countable number of possible . In addition , by construction see Fig . , the at : , ,... and : , ,... are not any more since by the change in Fig . , at : , ,... and : , ,... contain of the uniformly distributed process : , ,.... As a result , the filter in Fig . is no longer the least mean square estimator since the may no longer be . For completeness , we illustrate in Fig . the relation between a and a scalar uniform additive noise channel , a result that was first pointed out in . Entropy : In what , we apply joint entropy across the vector memoryless across the time , that is , at each time output of the is conditioned to the dither to generate a . The by the signal from . Specifically , at every time step , we require that a message is into a , designed , Chapter . . For a random variable , the based on scheme give an instantaneous prefix free code with code length that the following bound Fig . : An equivalent model to Fig . b based on scalar uniform additive noise channel . In view of the assumption that the scalar uniform with subtractive dither memoryless entropy over time , the following theorem . Consider the realization of the zero delay source scheme in Fig . with the change of channel with parallel independently operating in Fig . . If the vector process : , ,... of the output is jointly entropy conditioned to the dither signal in a memoryless fashion for each , then the operational zero delay rate , , the dimension of the state space representation given in , while the average distortion the end to end average the system . Evidently , by combining the lower and upper to the by zero delay , we obtain The derived in based on the scheme of Fig . hold for vector of any order . In the next remark , we comment on and draw to in the literature . Remark . For scalar AR , i . e ., , then to This result was first in , Theorem but only for stable scalar AR . Note that the zero delay rate distortion performance per dimension is given by the following expression It is interesting to observe that if instead of scalar uniform quantization we quantize over a vector lattice by memoryless entropy conditioned to the dither , then the upper bound in becomes where is the second moment of the lattice . If we take the average rate per dimension then becomes Additionally , by assuming an infinite dimensional vector source , then by , Lemma and we obtain As , vector quantization for infinite dimensional vector source , the term due to space filling loss and the loss due to entropy asymptotically goes to zero . In this work , we considered zero delay source of an unstable vector AR source under average fidelity criterion . Based on a simple feedback realization scheme that the of a filter with a , we derived new to the by zero delay . We the performance of this scheme when lattice quantization . For infinite we that the is in fact the by zero delay . In the realization scheme in Fig . , with the change of channel with parallel independently operating , the operational rate for equal to the conditional entropy where , ,..., ,, , i i at , i , i , i ,...,, i . e ., the entropy of the output conditioned on the value of the dither signal . This to the following analysis . where a from , Theorem ; from the fact that the quantization noise is at see Fig . ; from the fact that the relative entropy x x , see , e .., , Theorem . . ; from the fact that at , with equality if and only if : , ,... becomes a distribution ; e from the fact that the differential entropy of a random vector with covariance , V ,..., is where a from the structural of specific problem resulting in the realization of Fig . see , e .., the analysis in Section and , Remark . ; from the analysis in , Equation ; from the fact that E ,, are invertible matrices and as a result the information from is the same as from at to information lossless operation . Since we are assuming joint memoryless entropy operating scalar uniform with subtractive dither , then by , for , ,...,, we obtain Then , by first taking the per unit time limiting expression in and then the , we obtain where a by and respectively , and na is the upper bound expression of for the unstable vector AR source model given by . Finally , by assumption , i . e ., the source model given by is asymptotically stationary , hence as the source becomes stationary . this , we have na and the result . This the proof . This can shown by the state of the source model given in as . Let denote a new state vector of the additional dynamics . Then the model of is as . where the matrices A , A are the coefficient matrices of augmented dynamics . At this point , , can be written as The state space representation of with the same on the augmented coefficient matrices A , can be used precisely as the feedback realization scheme of Fig . via a filter where the structure of the filter is the one derived in , Section . This the proof . ﻿ The performance of a noisy linear time invariant plant , over a noiseless digital channel with transmission delay , is in this paper . The channel the single measurement output of the plant to its single control input through a causal , but otherwise arbitrary , coder controller pair . An approach is to analyze the minimal average data rate to attain the quadratic performance when the channel a known constant delay on the data . This average data rate is shown to be lower bounded by the directed information rate across a set of and an additive white noise channel . It is that the presence of time delay in the channel the data rate to achieve a certain level of performance . The applicability of the is through a numerical example . Rate constrained are generally studied from two of view ; control theory and information theory . In the former case , classical nonlinear control are employed . In the latter case , the key idea is extending information theoretic to the case of closed loop control . In both , stability analysis of linear is well studied see , e .., , as early and , as recent . However , system performance from an information theoretic viewpoint are less abundant in the literature . Fundamental are in . In this work , for a discrete time plant , the well known Bode integral is extended to the case of causal rate limited arbitrary feedback . Along the of , research in , on the minimum data rate which is to attain a quadratic performance level in with delay free . For the lower bound , that the rate constrained optimization to find desired data over causal but otherwise arbitrary coder controller , is reduced to a convex constrained optimization problem over an auxiliary feedback loop closed through an channel . In , , it is furthermore shown that the directed information from the plant output and to the control input a lower bound on the rate for any policy , and that it to use linear , when the initial state and external are jointly and the plant is linear . These were used by , to establish a general framework for the problem of control for fully observable multiple input multiple output . In this paper , we address output feedback control of an comprised of a noisy plant and a causal controller set connected through a noiseless digital channel with a constant transmission delay . More specifically , the problem is the on minimal average data rate to guarantee that the steady state variance of an error signal does not become than a certain value . by its such as simplicity and practical appeal , we use the approach in , to gain outer and build upon . However , the main departure of this work from is considering a channel which is not delay free . So , as the first contribution , we fundamental information of the system under the delay assumption . Secondly , we characterize the trade off among performance , delay , and minimal desired average data rate . It is shown through a numerical example that greater transmission delay greater minimal average data rate to guarantee the considered quadratic level of performance . Simulation that by a simple scalar uniform in the architecture that the lower bound , the quadratic performance is by operational average data at most . away from the lower bound . The outline of this work is as . Section the notation and some . Then the problem of interest is in Section . Section is to the lower bound characterization . An illustrative numerical simulation is provided in section . Finally , Section the paper . The set of real is subset as the set of strictly positive real . the set of natural , based upon which N is defined . Furthermore , is the time index and for random considered in this paper , N . Magnitude and H norm of a signal are by . and . k , respectively . The set U is defined as the set of all proper and real rational stable transfer with that are stable and proper as well . E the expectation operator and log for the natural logarithm . The entry of the i th row and th column is by i ,. Moreover , min and represent the and magnitude , respectively . All random and in this paper are assumed to be vector valued , unless otherwise stated . A random process is said to be asymptotically wide sense stationary if it and E E E hold , where is a constant . the corresponding steady state covariance matrix upon which the steady state variance of is defined as , trace . The covariance matrix for a scalar random sequence is defined as . Considering , as two square matrices , the and are asymptotically equivalent if and only if the following for finite : The structure considered in this work can be found in Fig . an plant with u as control input sensor output . Moreover , there is a disturbance by and the output signal , with , , upon which the desired performance is . The plant the following transfer function matrix description : , , and for G , G , G and G , respectively . The input alphabet of the channel is by A and is defined as a countable set of binary . Due to the delay , the output of the channel to A . The average data rate across the channel is as : where i the length of the i th binary word i . The channel input is provided by the E based on the following dynamics : in which e is the side information at the with an arbitrary possibly nonlinear or time deterministic . It should be noted that is a shorthand for . On the side , we have is assumed to be an arbitrary deterministic , like , and the side information available at the at time . It should be that E Fig . are possibly time or nonlinear causal . Assumption . : The , proper and free of unstable hidden . Moreover , the open loop transfer function from u single input single output and strictly proper . The disturbance signal ,, is a zero mean white noise with identity covariance matrix I and jointly with x , the initial condition , finite differential entropy . Assumption . : Each of e and is jointly independent of x ,. So regarding the dynamics of the system , I u ; for . Moreover , upon knowledge of and di , the is invertible . It that there a deterministic Now , suppose that Assumption . . Let denote the steady state variance of the all u for and u independent of x and . for any , , where the search is to be restricted to with and with which satisfy Assumption . and make the of Fig . strongly asymptotically wide sense stationary this notion of stability is defined in . Moreover , the steady state variance of . The optimization problem in is feasible if , see Appendix A for the proof . Theorem . : For the feedback loop in Fig . and satisfying . and . , the following : see for the definition . Moreover , as defined in , the directed information rate across the forward channel u with delay . The proof can be found in . Now , a lower bound can be derived on the directed information across the scheme of Fig . . ,, u , form a jointly second order set of and that . and . hold . Moreover , take and uG into account as the u where ,, uG , are jointly with the same first and second order cross as ,, u ,. where a from a slight modification in , Lemma . , from , Lemma . , form the chain based upon b in , Theorem . , is a consequence of Assumption . and being a deterministic function of , and wi , and e from a in , Theorem . and Assumption . . This the proof . In what we will relate the directed information from to uG to their corresponding power spectral : Lemma . : u as jointly . Moreover , suppose that u is with where . Then the following Proof : and joint ness of u , in mind and based on , Theorem . with a little modification , we can conclude that is and as well . We start by the following : where from the definition of mutual information and from the definition of , from , Property and , and i from , Property . So the directed information rate can therefore be as : where from the chain rule of the differential entropy and being independent of . Since the process u is with for some , , Lemma . will approve the validity of the leftmost term in . The rightmost term is self explanatory because is and . It from Theorem . , Lemma . and Lemma . that the rate performance pair by any scheme which the , is attainable with a lower rate by a scheme comprised of and an noise source . Such a scheme is in Fig . . The of Fig . is defined under the same Assumption . as the main system in Fig . except for one thing ; the arbitrary are by . Moreover , the communication channel is a channel with noiseless one sample feedback . The dynamics of this auxiliary scheme can be as : in which is the with zero mean and variance . This noise is assumed to be independent of x ,. Additionally , we suppose that the initial state of ,, and the delay are deterministic . Theorem . : For the in Fig . and satisfying . and . , is lower bounded as if , : where the feasible set for the optimization problem u is the noise with rendering the feedback loop of Fig . internally stable and well when . In these , and denote the steady state variance of z and the steady state power spectral density of u in Fig . , respectively . Proof : Since , there is at least one pair , say and , satisfying Assumption . , rendering the of Fig . and , and where and can be based on Theorem . , if the in Lemma . and Lemma . are met . It should be noted that the steady state power spectral density of . A scheme comprised of linear with a unit gain noisy channel and generate and which satisfy those and keep within , . Such a scheme is as : where a noise with zero mean and independent of . Regarding the causality and linearity of , can be written as : According to the causality in , joint ness of , and transitivity of asymptotic equivalence for and sum of the matrices noted in , the and are asymptotically equivalent to of lower triangular matrices . Moreover , the internally stable and well . With all of this in mind , by setting a concatenation of linear with the steady state behaviour of in and considering a variance for equal to , the system of Fig . will be well and internally stable where and are . Then according to Lemma . , the following can be : Lemma . : Consider the loop of Fig . with fixed . Define as : in which the steady state power spectral density of . Then for any , upon the existence of the pair , B , J making the system of Fig . internally stable and well , there exist another pair , comprised of the filter J and B , which the feedback loop of Fig . internally stable and well , the the steady state power spectral density of z and the following : Proof : It is well known that the system of Fig . is well and internally stable if and only if the transfer ,, , to z , y ,, u in Fig . to . By Ti and , we refer to the set such that , i , . Moreover , and represent of By in the situation where . Now , consider the following set of : in which d the relative degree of J and U is chosen in such a way that . Consequently , J is and T can be written as : So regarding the definition of d and of , T if and only if T . Moreover , based on the same argument , B , J would give the same power spectral density for z as for the case where B , J is . Let d ,..., represent the of lying on the unit circle . Now for , we define the following : Hence , U and can be for every , . By following the same procedure as for the proof of , Theorem . , the existence of , will be shown in such a way that for any , setting will give a pair B , J that . Corollary . : If . and . hold for the of Fig . and , , then where the optimization is done over all filter , and the noise variance making the system in Fig . internally stable and well . Proof : According to the feasibility of finding u see for the proof , there exist the triplet , with a proper filter and , that for the system of Fig . . Furthermore , based upon the definition of and in and , the following can be derived for any : So regarding Lemma . , since there exist a filter and a proper one making the feedback loop of Fig . internally stable and well and keeping intact , the following can be : To characterize , we will mostly use of linear and some on H optimization with input delay . Consider the structure of Fig . , where except for shifting the delay block to the plant model , which to the same as Fig . hold . The of Fig . is internally stable and well if and only if the transfer function Ta from ,, , to za , ya , ra , in Fig . is a member of . It can be easily shown that Ta . So the feedback of Fig . and Fig . are equivalent in the sense of internal stability and well ness . Moreover , the and output variance of the in Fig . can be stated in of H as : . Likewise , the following for the structure of Fig . : and . So every triplet that can the while making the system output satisfy for the of Fig . , can do the same for the the system of interest , in Fig . , and vice . In other , the in Fig . and Fig . are equivalent regarding the optimization problem in as well . This problem is studied for such feedback as auxiliary system of Fig . in . Consequently , it can be that the problem of finding is equivalent to an constrained optimal control problem which was proved to be convex . As another result , being a monotonically decreasing be . All in all , the interplay between the desired performance , the average data rate and the time delay is through Consider the the following transfer function representation for the of Fig . : where x , Assumption . . the of the previous section , we simulate the lower bound on in regarding five different of delay , , , , and for each , over a range of . Fig . the behaviour of the lower bound with respect . Additionally , it the operational when scalar uniform for and . First , as , in is a monotonically decreasing function of . Secondly and more importantly , when see . So greater delay worse best performance . The most significant outcome is associated with the behaviour of in with respect to delay . It can be from Fig . that for a fixed , is increasing in . Therefore , a delay in the channel an increase in the data rate to achieve a quadratic level of performance . The greater delay , the higher rate to be spent in order to get a certain level of performance . Indeed , this finding the delay free of . Another observation is the convergence of the data to the minimum rate for as . As in Fig . , high are to attain the ideal non performance . Along the of , , we now simply replace the in the independent scheme in Fig . , by a uniform scalar in order to assess the operational performance by a simple scheme . It is interesting to note that the operational average data rate in Fig . is at most around . away from the derived lower bound at all performance . In this paper , rate constrained control noisy , causal but otherwise arbitrary control and digital noiseless communication with time delay , have been studied . For such , a certain level of performance is attainable if and only if the average data rate does not fall below a minimal value . A lower bound on this rate been . Through a numerical example , it been that the channel time delay the average data rate to achieve a level of performance . Moreover , by a simple scalar , operational average data fairly close around . to the lower bound have been ., x Assumption . . Regarding the of x the fact , it can be from some in in which the variance of is the set of all proper which render the system of Fig . internally stable and well . The considered that finding is feasible . The feasibility of finding u in and in from the feasibility of . ﻿ By on a class of source built around entropy , we develop a framework to deal with average data rate in a tractable manner that from both information and control . We focus on a situation where a noisy linear system been designed assuming transparent feedback and , due to implementation , a source scheme to be in the feedback path . We give a closed form expression for the minimal average data rate to achieve a given performance level , and also study the interplay between stability and average data for the considered architecture . Consider the control system of Figure , a given proper real rational transfer function , is an exogenous signal , e is a signal related to closed loop performance , can be measured , u is a manipulable input , and the channel is a noiseless digital channel . where P is and strictly proper , and both P and P are non zero . The initial state a second order random variable a second order process with . If no but causality are on the source and , then mild guarantee that the of Figure is mean square stable see definition in Section if and only if the average data the scheme i . e ., across the channel where pi is the unstable pole of . When performance are sought , then much less is known . A causal rate distortion inspired approach was in , but no achievable rate where established there . Theorem : Consider a causal source scheme inside a feedback loop , as in Figure . Under suitable see , I u , where I u the directed mutual information rate defined by . Definition : The source scheme of Figure is said to be independent the of Theorem hold and the noise , a second order zero mean i . i .. sequence , is independent of and O is a stable and stably and causally invertible filter with deterministic initial state see Figure a . Any independent source scheme can be written as shown in Figure , auxiliary , is as in Definition , and A auxiliary stable , and both A and are stably and causally invertible . Moreover : Theorem : If an independent is written as in Figure , then I u I . The previous fact one to focus on I instead of I u . It is possible to establish upper on I that depend only on second order : Theorem : If in the of Figure the source scheme is independent , then where is the stationary of is the stationary variance of , and is the variance of . Equality in the first inequality is , whereas equality in the second inequality of is constant a . e . An additional key fact of independent source is stated next see also : Theorem : For any given independent source scheme , there another independent source scheme , with the same noise color O and the same directed mutual information rate across it , such that the gap between the left and right hand sides of the second inequality of Theorem can be made arbitrarily small . Theorem : Consider the system of Figure with A before . If an is used as the link , and the dither is i . i .., independent of ,, and uniformly distributed on , , then the system of Figure becomes an independent source scheme and the entropy coder inside the can be chosen so that If the entropy coder inside the is memoryless , then it can be chosen so that Definition : A system , N , , , where is a second order random variable , and are constant matrices , a second order process is said to be mean square stable there exist finite and a finite and positive semi definite such that E , The previous definition to the of Figure , when the source scheme is independent . Theorem : Consider the setup and of Theorem . Then , irrespective of whether the entropy coder inside the memory or not , the minimal average data rate compatible with , say , . Theorem : Consider the setup and of Theorem . If , then , irrespective of whether the entropy coder inside the memory or not , the minimal average data rate that one to attain a performance level se , say , The bound on provided by Theorem is , by construction , achievable . To our knowledge , our result to the first closed form bound on the achievable average data rate to attain a given performance level . We note that , if , is , then the bound on given in is tight up to sample . ﻿ This paper novel on the optimal design of Noise Shaping Differential Pulse Modulation . The main contribution in the derivation of explicit analytic for the optimal and the minimum achievable frequency weighted reconstruction error . A novel aspect in the analysis is the fact that we account for fed back quantization noise and that we make no on the order of the . to Digital which utilize a scalar and linear , time invariant in a feedback loop have been extensively employed as a source method since the concept was first in the . The generalized form of this architecture , which we denote Noise Shaping Differential Pulse Code Modulation , can be as in Fig The in a system allow one to account for the correlation between consecutive input , and to spectrally shape the quantization noise in the output , so as to minimize the frequency weighted mean square reconstruction error . Special of the architecture include and noise shaping , such as one and bit Sigma Delta . are extensively used in the context of audio compression , digital image half and A conversion . Provided that the input power spectral density , frequency weighting error criterion , and scalar are known , the design of an converter that minimum to finding the corresponding optimal . This been an intense area of research for at least . However , available to date on optimal filter design for have been assuming either fixed , finite order , negligible fed back quantization noise or have upon heuristic design Since optimal performance can , in general , only be by arbitrary order designed accounting for fed back quantization noise , an exact characterization of the optimal performance and for an open problem . In this paper we derive an explicit analytic expression for the optimal performance and filter frequency for . We characterize the scalar via its signal to noise ratio , and adopt a white quantization noise model . The performance bound to the minimum that can be by an with any linear , time invariant . A key departure from which , to the best of our knowledge , the only currently available explicit analytic to the problem , is that we account for fed back quantization noise . This us to derive exact . Our show that an optimal converter several interesting . These include a spectrally flat frequency weighted error spectrum , and a white signal at the input of the scalar . We also show that , for AR , the rate distortion efficiency with the optimal only on how efficient the scalar is at nearly . We use standard vector space notation for . For example , is used to denote . We also the argument of the transform . Given two square integrable complex valued and defined over ,, we adopt the inner product where complex conjugation . We denote the usual norm as is a transfer function , then we use the short hand refer to the associated frequency response , ,. If I is a set , then we will write a . e . on I almost everywhere on I as a short hand notation for everywhere on I except at most on a zero measure set of . We use to denote the variance of a given wide sense stationary ... random process Note that , where one to describe the minimal prediction error variance of a ... , . The spectral flatness measure of a ... . It is easy to show that , and that if and only if is constant a . e . on ,. As in the introduction , we consider the general form of an architecture shown in Figure . In our model , the input assumed to be a zero mean ,... random process , with known satisfying , a . e . on ,. The element scalar , with given and known . For each input ,, it and the quantization error , . The three discrete time , and in Fig . are design . To performance , we introduce the delay frequency weighted error , , where . The error weighting filter the impact that reconstruction have on each frequency . Thus , it is application dependent . In this paper , we restrict attention to the in which , ,, i . e ., no on the unit circle . Additionally , we require : Constraint : and are stable . In addition , is strictly causal i . e ., . The first part in the above constraint is in order to avoid unbounded in the converter . The additional requirement on is for the feedback loop in Fig . to be well defined see , e .. Chap Since the architecture a nonlinear element a scalar within a feedback loop , exact analysis of quantization is , in general , a formidable task . This the widespread use of an additive noise model for quantization This model one to study the converter via linear analysis . It is usually as : Assumption : The quantization are i . i .. random , uncorrelated with the input signal . In order not to limit our subsequent analysis to a specific type of scalar , the following is also assumed : Assumption : The probability density function not affected by the in the converter other than via its second moment . Under Assumption , any given type of scalar with a fixed number of quantization to quantization whose variance is proportional to the variance of its input . This can be stated as where is the signal to noise ratio of the scalar not to be confused with that of the system . on the number of quantization , the of the signal being and the of the scalar itself . Our ultimate goal is to find the frequency of the A ,, minimize the variance of under and , and for given and known , and . The will constitute the achievable lower bound on the for the converter . Towards the above goal , we first derive an expression that the decision to the error measure that we wish to minimize . From equation , Assumption , and we have where is the variance of the quantization error , and is a delay version of , the frequency response . The first term on the right hand side of to the variance of the frequency weighted quantization error in . The second term in for the frequency weighted linear distortion by the in the pair . The variance is related to via . From Assumption , the latter is given by . Combining this result with The above expression the , and the signal to noise ratio , to the . Minimization of this cost functional will yield for the optimal and performance . For comparison , we note that the cost functional , together with and , is also part of the analysis in , and , wherein equivalent optimization are . In this section we derive explicit analytic for the optimal and the associated optimal performance for the scheme , subject to a mild restriction . The analysis is based on a set of that the optimal must necessarily satisfy . To facilitate the flow of , all are given in the Appendix . Minimization of is simplified by that , for stable and strictly causal , it that . Substitution of this equality into Notice that the cost functional in only two unknown , . This it simpler to work with than the functional in . The optimization problem can be further simplified by writing the of . Unfortunately , the relationship the optimal , for the general case , can only be stated implicitly , as shown next . Remark : Notice that , from , is a positive , symmetric and real valued function of . It then from that the product of the optimal , must exhibit linearly decreasing phase . In general , the presence of in the inner product on the right hand side of it difficult , if not impossible , to express the in of . However , under specific on , and , an analytical explicit solution to can be , as : Lemma : Provided , a . e . on ,, then , for a given frequency response , the optimal , a . e . on ,. To summarize our so far , we have shown that , provided , the . These two , in turn , determine the optimal A and , respectively . We can now state the main result of this paper : Theorem : If a . e . on ,, then the minimum achievable frequency weighted reconstruction of an converter is The stated in Theorem have very interesting . Some of these are below . of Scalar Quantization Without Feedback : It is easy to verify from the in Theorem that scalar quantization without feedback is optimal if and only if is constant . In particular , it from that if , a . e . on ,, then the optimal converter to a converter with a fully whitening filter and a post filter satisfying A and A . Comparison with : The minimum for an system derived by Noll in , fed back quantization noise , is . Perhaps surprisingly , Theorem that the optimal performance is slightly better compare with . Moreover , the corresponding optimal AN , and derived in respectively . Substituting these into actually an , where is the spectral flatness Total Frequency Weighted Distortion is White : It from and that , in an system , the of frequency weighted quantization noise and linear distortion are , respectively Theorem , the noise shaping by an optimal system is not complete , i . e ., frequency weighted quantization noise is not white . However , the of the total frequency weighted error is white , since Relation with the Reverse Water Filling Paradigm : The parametric Rate Distortion formula for a ... process and as the distortion measure is given by the well known reverse water filling paradigm see , e .. For , it total frequency weighted distortion to be equally distributed over frequency . It also the input signal to appear at the output with , i . e ., less significant spectral higher attenuation . Interestingly , is equivalent to , a . e . on ,. Furthermore , is flat , as , and , in full agreement with the above prediction . Output of the Scalar is White : It can be seen from a that , unless is constant , the optimal A is not a full whitening filter for . Interestingly , however , it is straightforward to verify that the optimal in render a Fig . with flat . More precisely A , where is the same arbitrary constant that in a . A remarkable implication is that the output of the converter can be efficiently into by of a first order entropy coder . Rate Distortion Analysis : The rate distortion efficiency of any source scheme with quadratic error as distortion measure can be established by its against the upper bound derived by O Neal in . For the case min , and to , this bound can be written as , log log , bit rate in per sample , is the spectral flatness measure is the minimum variance associated Section I . Notice upper bound for the in of a memoryless source . On the other hand , under the of Theorem and , the best achievable of an system is given by : By and , we see that the of the converter via Theorem from the information theoretic upper bound as : The difference , log for of long been known for a variety of scalar memoryless see , e .. and the therein . be in the converter , can be by . and . for a uniform with entropy E .., non uniform with E .., non uniform for without E .., and uniform quantization without E .. and a loading factor of , respectively see This paper derived explicit analytic for the best achievable performance and optimal for . These , which we believe to be novel , were found by accounting for fed back quantization noise in the optimization . The in this paper simplify the analysis and design of , and provide valuable insight into the trade inherent in linear feedback . Proof : is a monotonically increasing function ,¡ minimization of is equivalent to . From inequality and the constraint , we obtain Equality is in a if and only if , a . e . on ,, for some . equality if and only if . This the proof . Substituting this into . Notice that that the denominator on the right hand side of is strictly positive . The proof is by that substitution of into the inequality , thus our initial supposition . Proof : Theorem Suppose the such that in Lemma . Then , one can substitute into to obtain to be stable and strictly causal from Con straint is equivalent to the function to belong to the set of non negative log integral defined in , see , e . Theorem .. and . Then , it from Lemma that the optimal is as in a . Substitution of the latter into . It also from a that the inequality in Lemma is equivalent to the condition by the theorem . This our initial supposition . Notice also that the latter inequality also that , as by Condition . Finally , substituting a into , and the of . This the proof . AR source subject to an average mean squared error fidelity criterion . Toward this end , we consider the nonanticipative rate distortion function which is a lower bound to the causal and zero delay rate distortion function . We use the realization scheme with feedback in to model the corresponding optimal of the , when considering vector AR subject to an average distortion . We give on the vector AR source to ensure asymptotic of the realization scheme bounded performance . Then , we encode the vector due to filtering via lattice quantization with subtractive dither and memoryless entropy . This scheme a tight upper bound to the zero delay . We extend this result to vector AR of any finite order . Further , we show that for infinite dimensional vector AR of any finite order , the with the zero delay . Our theoretical framework is with a simulation example . Zero delay source is desirable in various real time , such as , in signal and control . Zero delay form a subclass of causal source see , namely , where the source on the source in a causal manner . However , zero delay source to causal source allow the reproduction of each source sample at the same time instant that the source sample is . Unfortunately , causal source does not exclude the possibility of long of , which may cost arbitrary end to end . Zero delay and causal in to cannot achieve the classical rate distortion function . Indeed , an open problem in information theory is the gap between the optimal performance theoretically attainable by non causal , and the by causal and zero delay , hereinafter by and , respectively . Notable where this gap is explicitly found are memoryless , stationary in high , and zero mean stationary scalar with average mean squared error distortion . Throughout the , the interest in zero delay is growing , thus , further research on the fundamental of the by zero delay . Unfortunately , it turns out that is very hard to compute and for this reason there been a turn in of classical that perform as tight as possible to In this paper , we derive a tight upper bound to zero delay source for vector AR subject to an average distortion . We consider nonanticipative rate distortion function see , e .., , , , which a lower bound to to the classical see , e .., . Then , we employ the feedback realization scheme in , Fig , that to the optimal test channel of for vector AR and average distortion . Further , we give to asymptotically stabilize the performance of the specific scheme . By standard entropy , on the of the feedback realization scheme , we derive the tight upper bound . In addition , we show how to generalize our scheme to vector AR of any finite order . If the vector dimension of the Gauss AR source to infinity , we show that the with the . We demonstrate our with a numerical example . Notation : We let , , N , ,.... We denote a sequence of its realization by , , ,...,. The distribution of by . The conditional distribution . For a square . The transpose of a with on the row and column , we denote by the matrix , i ,...,, on its diagonal and zero elsewhere . In this paper we consider the zero delay source setting in Fig . . In this setting , the dimensional vector source is by the following linear time invariant state space model ; is the initial state , and the noise process is an i . i .. ; sequence , independent of x . We allow A to have outside the unit circle which that can be unstable . The system as . At every time step , the the source and a single binary from a set of of at most a countable number of . Since the source is random , and its length are . Upon , the an estimate of the source sample . We assume that both the and process information without delay and they are to have infinite memory of the past . The analysis of the noiseless digital channel is restricted to the class of instantaneous variable length binary . The countable set of all is to allow the binary representation to be an arbitrarily long sequence . The and are by of conditional probability as , : N and , : N , respectively . At , we assume , x x and , z z These design are formally cast by the following optimization problem : In this section , we give the definition of of vector AR subject to an average distortion the reconstruction distribution by , and the joint distribution by . The marginal on , , is induced by the joint distribution We assume that at , , x x . Given the previous , we introduce the mutual information between and yn as where E is the expectation with respect to the joint distribution Definition . with average distortion The finite time is defined by The optimization problem of Definition , in contrast to the one given in is convex see e .., . In addition , for the source model and the average distortion , then , by , , the optimal test channel corresponding to is of the form , N , where at , , x x , and the corresponding joint process , : N is jointly . The in , Theorem the optimal test channel of with the feedback realization scheme in , Fig that to a realization of the form : where is a scaling matrix ; is an independent noise process with ; , independent of x ; the with with ;, and . Moreover , are given by the following filter Fig . : Asymptotically stationary feedback realization scheme corresponding to . , and is an orthogonal matrix . It is easy to verify that the following hold : where I the identity matrix . By substituting in , we can also observe that , The realization scheme of becomes asymptotically stationary stable if one of the following two hold : A is stable , i . e ., its have magnitude less than one ; the limit of the covariance matrix , i . e ., with . This that with , and Next , we briefly discuss the resulting asymptotically stationary realization scheme in Fig . . or , we ensure that and it is unique . The error covariance matrix is by an orthogonal matrix E invertible matrix such that E E . To facilitate the computation , we introduce the scaling process , where at : Analogously , we introduce the process : N defined by d and the scaling process : N defined by , with asymptotic of and , respectively . The fidelity criterion at not affected by the above of , : N , in the sense that the at both the and do not affect the form of the squared error distortion function , that is , The steady state of b is . The end to end distortion of the scheme in Fig . is trace Hence , following , Theorem , the per unit time asymptotic limit of subject to the total distortion can be expressed as . Clearly , the optimization problem in , is a minimization problem and can be , for instance , Tucker , Chapter . . or semidefinite . A way of is in . However , to that work , our realization scheme is with feedback to take into account the effect of unstable in the dynamical system . In this section , we derive an upper bound to the zero delay a uniform scalar on the feedback realization scheme of Fig . . The scheme was in and since then it been used in several see , e .., , , under various realization . However , it never been for the realization scheme in this work . Here , we consider the vector AR source of , and we quantize each time operating , with their being jointly entropy conditioned to the dither . We extend our when vector quantization showing that at infinite dimensional , the space filling loss due to compression and the entropy , i . e ., and coincide . Next , we use the asymptotically stationary feedback realization scheme in Fig . to design an efficient , pair . We select the step size so that the covariance of the resulting quantization error . The does not quantize the state directly . Instead , it the deviation of from the linear estimate of . This method is known in least estimation theory as Fig . : Scalar quantization by a dimensional channel operating . approach and , therefore , the is as an . We consider the zero delay source setup in Fig . with the additional change of the parallel operating . This is in Fig . . Note that , all matrices and adopted in Fig . still hold when the replacement is applied . For each time step , the input to the , is a scaled estimation error defined as Moreover , at is an valued random process . The parallel dimensional channel is operating , hence we can design the covariance matrix of the corresponding to the parallel in such a way , that for each , each diagonal entry of , i ,...,, i . e ., , to correspond to a quantization step size i , i ,...,, such that This a input output transmission of parallel and independent . We apply to each component of at , i . e ., and we let be the valued random process of dither whose individual , ,... are mutually independent and uniformly distributed , i independent of the corresponding source input at , i , , i . The output of the is given by Note that , ,..., , can take a countable number of possible . In addition , by construction see Fig . , the at : , ,... and : , ,... are not any more since by the change in Fig . , at : , ,... and : , ,... contain of the uniformly distributed process : , ,.... As a result , the filter in Fig . is no longer the least mean square estimator . Entropy : In what , we apply joint entropy across the vector memoryless across the time , that is , at each time output of the is conditioned to the dither to generate a . The by the signal from . Specifically , at every time step , we require that a message is into a , designed , Chapter . . For a , the based on scheme give an instantaneous prefix free code with code length that the E . Since the memoryless entropy over time , the following theorem . Consider the realization of the zero delay source scheme in Fig . with the change of channel with parallel independently operating in Fig . . If the vector process : , ,... of the output is jointly entropy conditioned to the dither signal in a memoryless fashion for each , then the operational zero delay rate the dimension of the state space representation given in , while the average distortion the end to end average the system . The previous main result combined with the lower bound on zero delay , to the following corollary . Consider the realization of the zero delay source scheme in Fig . with the change of channel with parallel independently operating as in Fig . . Then , for vector stable or unstable AR the following hold Proof . This is the fact that , and Theorem . The derived in Corollary based on the realization scheme of Fig . hold for vector of any order . Proof . This is shown by the state of the model of . For see , Appendix . For stationary stable scalar valued AR , our upper bound in Theorem with the bound in , Theorem . However , the upper bound in is a realization scheme with four instead of only one that we use in our scheme . In addition , our result into account unstable too . Compare to , we use based on a different realization setup that into different lower and upper . Example . We consider a two dimensional unstable AR source as : where R , the parameter matrix A is unstable because one of its , by i A , magnitude greater than one , the pair A , is and ; I . By we plot the theoretical attainable lower and upper to the . This is in Fig . . As from theory , source sample . It is interesting to observe that if instead of uniform scalar quantization we quantize over a lattice vector by memoryless entropy conditioned to the dither , then the upper bound in becomes where is the second moment of the lattice . If we take the average rate per dimension and assume an infinite dimensional vector source , then by , Lemma , , and the due to space filling loss and the loss due to entropy in asymptotically goes to zero . the latter , and the fact that , we obtain We considered zero delay source of a vector AR source under distortion . Based on a feedback realization scheme that the of a filter with a , we derived an upper bound to the . We the performance of this scheme when lattice quantization . For infinite we that the coincide with the zero delay . An illustrative example is to support our . As an ongoing research , we will apply the scheme based on to find the actual operational corresponding to the zero delay . Moreover , we will examine similar for fixed length rate .